Exported on: 21/02/2023
Clinical guidelines - Diagnosis and treatment
manual
For curative programmes in hospitals and dispensaries
Guidance for prescribing
 
 
© Médecins Sans Frontières
All rights reserved for all countries. No reproduction, translation and adaptation may be done without the prior
permission of the Copyright owner.
 This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
ISBNMédecins Sans Frontières. Clinical guidelines - Diagnosis and treatment manual.
December 2022
978-2-37585-200-2
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Table of contents
Authors/Contributors
Preface
Abbreviations and acronyms
Chapter 1: A few symptoms and syndromes
Shock
Seizures
Hypoglycaemia
Fever
Pain
Anaemia
Dehydration
Severe acute malnutrition
Chapter 2: Respiratory diseases
Acute upper airway obstruction
Rhinitis and rhinopharyngitis (common cold)
Acute sinusitis
Acute pharyngitis
Diphtheria
Other upper respiratory tract infections
Laryngotracheitis and laryngotracheobronchitis (croup)
Epiglottitis
Bacterial tracheitis
Otitis
Acute otitis externa
Acute otitis media (AOM)
Chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM)
Whooping cough (pertussis)
Bronchitis
Acute bronchitis
Chronic bronchitis
Bronchiolitis
Acute pneumonia
Pneumonia in children under 5 years of age
Pneumonia in children over 5 years and adults
Persistent pneumonia
Staphylococcal pneumoniaThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Asthma
Asthma attack (acute asthma)
Chronic asthma
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Chapter 3: Gastrointestinal disorders
Acute diarrhoea
Shigellosis
Amoebiasis
Disorders of the stomach and duodenum
Gastro-oesophageal reﬂux
Gastric and duodenal ulcers in adults
Dyspepsia
Stomatitis
Oral and oropharyngeal candidiasis
Oral herpes
Other infectious causes
Stomatitis from scurvy (vitamin C deﬁciency)
Other lesions resulting from a nutritional deﬁciency
Chapter 4: Skin diseases
Dermatology
Scabies
Lice (pediculosis)
Superﬁcial fungal infections
Bacterial skin infections
Impetigo
Furuncles and carbuncles
Erysipelas and cellulitis
Cutaneous anthrax
Endemic treponematoses
Leprosy
Herpes simplex and herpes zoster
Herpes simplex
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Other skin disorders
Eczema
Seborrheic dermatitis
Urticaria
Pellagra
Chapter 5: Eye diseasesThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Xerophthalmia (vitamin A deﬁciency)
Conjunctivitis
Neonatal conjunctivitis
Viral epidemic keratoconjunctivitis
Trachoma
Periorbital and orbital cellulitis
Other pathologies
Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Loiasis
Pterygium
Cataract
Chapter 6: Parasitic diseases
Malaria
Human African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness)
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease)
Leishmaniases
Intestinal protozoan infections (parasitic diarrhoea)
Flukes
Schistosomiases
Cestodes
Nematode infections
Filariasis
Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Loiasis
Lymphatic ﬁlariasis (LF)
Chapter 7: Bacterial diseases
Bacterial meningitis
Tetanus
Enteric (typhoid and paratyphoid) fevers
Brucellosis
Plague
Leptospirosis
Relapsing fever (borreliosis)
Louse-borne relapsing fever (LBRF)
Tick-borne relapsing fever (TBRF)
Eruptive rickettsioses
Chapter 8: Viral diseases
Measles
PoliomyelitisThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Rabies
Viral hepatitis
Dengue
Viral haemorrhagic fevers
HIV infection and AIDS
Chapter 9: Genito-urinary diseases
Nephrotic syndrome in children
Urolithiasis
Acute cystitis
Acute pyelonephritis
Acute prostatitis
Genital infections
Urethral discharge
Abnormal vaginal discharge
Genital ulcers
Lower abdominal pain in women
Upper genital tract infections (UGTI)
Venereal warts
Major genital infections (summary)
Abnormal uterine bleeding (in the absence of pregnancy)
Chapter 10: Medical and minor surgical procedures
Dressings
Treatment of a simple wound
Burns
Cutaneous abscess
Pyomyositis
Leg ulcers
Necrotising infections of the skin and soft tissues
Venomous bites and stings
Dental infections
Chapter 11: Mental disorders in adults
Anxiety
Insomnia
Agitation
Acute confusional state (delirium)
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Depression
Psychotic disorders
Acute psychotic episodeThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chronic psychoses
Bipolar disorder
Chapter 12: Other conditions
Sickle cell disease
Diabetes type 2 in adults
Essential hypertension in adults
Heart failure in adults
Chronic heart failure
Acute heart failure (acute pulmonary oedema)
Endemic goitre and iodine deﬁciency
Appendices
Appendix 1. Normal daily maintenance IV ﬂuids in children > 1 month
Main references
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Authors/Contributors
 
 
The Clinical guidelines  has been developed by Médecins Sans Frontières.
 
MSF would like to express its sincere gratitude to everyone who has contributed to developing these guidelines.
 
Co-authors: Grace Dubois, Blandine Vasseur-Binachon, Cedric Yoshimoto
 
Contributors: Gabriel Alcoba, Beatriz Alonso, Mohana Amirtharajah, Haydar Alwash, Catherine Bachy, Roberta
Caboclo, Severine Caluwaerts, Cristina Carreno, Arlene Chua, Kate Clezy, Anne-Sophie Coutin, Marcio da Fonseca,
Martin De Smet, Eva Deplecker, Carolina Echeverri, Sylvie Fagard-Sultan, Roopan Gill, Sonia Guinovart, Jarred Halton,
Kerstin Hanson, Christian Heck, Caroline Henry-Ostian, Cathy Hewison, Yves-Laurent Jackson, Carolina Jimenez, John
Johnson, Rupa Kanapathipillai, Mohamad Khalife, Nadia Lafferty, Amin Lamrous, James Lee, Helen McColl, Natasha
Mlakar, Juno Min, Miguel Palma, Isabella Panunzi, Roberta Petrucci, Nicolas Peyraud, Ernestina Repetto, Jean Rigal,
Koert Ritmeijer, Julia Sander, Raghda Sleit, Erin Stratta, Alex Telnov, Malcolm Townsend, Clara Van Gulik.
 
Speciﬁc support has been given by the International Guidelines Publication team:
Editor: Véronique Grouzard
Language editors: Mohamed Elsonbaty Ramadan, Carolina López, Anna Romero
Lay-out designer: Evelyne Laissu
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Preface
 
 
This guide is designed for use by medical professionals involved in curative care at the dispensary and primary hospital.
 
We have tried to respond in the simplest and most practical way possible to the questions and problems faced by ﬁeld
medical staff, using the accumulated ﬁeld experience of Médecins Sans Frontières, the recommendations of reference
organizations such as the World Health Organization (WHO) and specialized works in each ﬁeld.
 
This edition touches on the curative and, to a lesser extent, the preventive aspects of the main diseases encountered
in the ﬁeld. The list is incomplete, but covers the essential needs.
 
This guide is used not only in programmes supported by Médecins Sans Frontières, but also in other programmes and in
other contexts. It is notably an integral part of the WHO Emergency Health Kit.
Médecins Sans Frontières has also issued French, Spanish and Arabic editions. Editions in other languages have also
been produced in the ﬁeld.
 
This guide is a collaborative effort of medical professionals from many disciplines, all with ﬁeld experience.
 
Despite all efforts, it is possible that certain errors may have been overlooked in this guide. Please inform the authors
of any errors detected. It is important to remember, that if in doubt, it is the responsibility of the prescribing medical
professional to ensure that the doses indicated in this manual conform to the manufacturer ’s speciﬁcations.
 
To ensure that this guide continues to evolve while remaining adapted to ﬁeld realities, please send any comments or
suggestions. 
 
As treatment protocols are regularly revised, please check the monthly updates.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Abbreviations and acronyms
 
Last update : November 2022
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
ACE angiotensin converting enzyme
ACT  artemisinin-based combination therapy 
AFB acid-fast bacillus
ALT alanine aminotransferase
ARV antiretroviral
AST aspartate aminotransferase
BCG  bacillus Calmette-Guérin 
BMI body mass index
BP  blood pressure 
°C  degree Celsius 
co-amoxiclav amoxicillin + clavulanic acid
co-trimoxazole sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim
CRT capillary reﬁll time
CSF cerebrospinal ﬂuid
CMV cytomegalovirus
D1 (D2, D3, etc.)  Day 1 or ﬁrst day (Day 2 or 2 day, Day 3 or 3 day, etc.)nd rd
dl  decilitre 
(e)FAST (extended) focused assessment with sonography for trauma
g  gram 
HBP high blood pressure (hypertension)
HF heart failure
HIV  human immunodeﬁciency virus 
HR heart rate
Ig immunoglobulinThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
IM  intramuscular 
IO intraosseous
IU  international unit 
IV  intravenous
kcal kilocalorie
kg  kilogram 
LP lumbar puncture
mg  milligram 
MIU million of international units
ml  millilitre 
mmHg  millimetre of mercury 
mmol  millimole 
MSF Médecins Sans Frontières
NSAID nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drug
ORS oral rehydration solution or salts
PCP pneumocystosis
PCR polymerase chain reaction
PO  per os – oral administration 
POCUS point-of-care ultrasound
RR respiratory rate
SAM severe acute malnutrition
SC  subcutaneous
SMX sulfamethoxazole
SMX + TMP sulfamethoxazole + trimethoprim = co-trimoxazole
SpO2 arterial blood oxygen saturation measured by pulse oximetryThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 tab  tablet 
TB  tuberculosis 
TMP trimethoprim
WHO  World Health Organization 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 1: A few symptoms and syndromes
Shock
Seizures
Hypoglycaemia
Fever
Pain
Anaemia
Dehydration
Severe acute malnutrition
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Shock
Acute circulatory failure leading to inadequate tissue perfusion which, if prolonged, results in irreversible organ failure.
Mortality is high without early diagnosis and treatment.
Aetiology and pathophysiology
Hypovolaemic shock
Absolute hypovolaemia due to signiﬁcant intravascular ﬂuid depletion:
 
Relative hypovolaemia due to vasodilation without concomitant increase in intravascular volume:
Septic shock
By a complex mechanism, often including vasodilation, heart failure and absolute hypovolaemia.
Cardiogenic shock
By decrease of cardiac output:
Clinical features
Signs common to most forms of shock
Signs speciﬁc to the mechanism of shock
Hypovolaemic shockInternal or external haemorrhage: post-traumatic, peri or postoperative, obstetrical (ectopic pregnancy, uterine
rupture, etc.), blood loss due to an underlying condition (gastrointestinal ulcer, etc.). A loss of greater than 30% of
blood volume in adults will lead to haemorrhagic shock.
Dehydration: severe diarrhoea and vomiting, intestinal obstruction, diabetic ketoacidosis or hyperosmolar coma,
etc.
Plasma leaks: extensive burns, crushed limbs, etc.
Anaphylactic reaction: allergic reaction to insect bites or stings; drugs, mainly neuromuscular blockers, antibiotics,
acetylsalicylic acid, colloid solutions (dextran, modiﬁed gelatin ﬂuid); equine sera; vaccines containing egg protein;
food, etc.
Acute haemolysis: severe malaria, drug poisoning (rare).
Direct injury to the myocardium: infarction, contusion, trauma, poisoning.
Indirect mechanism: arrhythmia, constrictive pericarditis, haemopericardium, pulmonary embolism, tension
pneumothorax, valvular disease, severe anaemia, beri beri, etc. 
Pallor, mottled skin, cold extremities, sweating and thirst.
Rapid and weak pulse often only detected on major arteries (femoral or carotid).
Low blood pressure (BP), narrow pulse pressure, BP sometimes undetectable.
Capillary reﬁll time (CRT) > 3 seconds.
Cyanosis, dyspnoea, tachypnoea are often present in varying degrees depending on the mechanism.
Consciousness usually maintained, but anxiety, confusion, agitation or apathy are common.
Oliguria or anuria.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
The common signs of shock listed above are typical of hypovolaemic shock.
Do not underestimate hypovolaemia. Signs of shock may not become evident until a 50% loss of blood volume in
adults.
Anaphylactic shock
Septic shock
Cardiogenic shock
 
The aetiological diagnosis is oriented by:
Management
Symptomatic and aetiological treatment must take place simultaneously.
In all cases
Management according to the cause
HaemorrhageSigniﬁcant and sudden drop in BP
Tachycardia
Frequent cutaneous signs: rash, urticaria, angioedema
Respiratory signs: dyspnoea, bronchospasm
High fever or hypothermia (< 36 °C), rigors, confusion
BP may be initially maintained, but rapidly, same pattern as for hypovolaemic shock.
Respiratory signs of left ventricular failure (acute pulmonary oedema) are dominant: tachypnoea, crepitations on
auscultation.
Signs of right ventricular failure: raised jugular venous pressure, hepatojugular reﬂux, sometimes alone, more often
associated with signs of left ventricular failure.
The context: trauma, insect bite, ongoing medical treatment, etc.
The clinical examination:
fever
skin pinch consistent with dehydration
thoracic pain from a myocardial infarction or pulmonary embolus
abdominal pain or rigidity of the abdominal wall from peritonitis, abdominal distension from intestinal obstruction
blood in stools, vomiting blood in intestinal haemorrhage
subcutaneous crepitations, likely anaerobic infection 
Emergency: immediate attention to the patient.
Warm the patient, lay him ﬂat, elevate legs (except in respiratory distress, acute pulmonary oedema).
Insert a peripheral IV line using a large calibre catheter (16G in adults). If no IV access, use intraosseous route.
Oxygen therapy, assisted ventilation in the event of respiratory distress.
Assisted ventilation and external cardiac compression in the event of cardiac arrest.
Intensive monitoring: consciousness, heart rate, BP, CRT, respiratory rate, hourly urinary output (insert a urinary
catheter) and skin mottling.
Control bleeding (compression, tourniquet, surgical haemostasis).
Determine blood group.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Severe acute dehydration due to bacterial/viral gastroenteritis
 
Note: in severely malnourished children the IV rate is different than those for healthy children (see Severe acute
malnutrition, Chapter 1).
Severe anaphylactic reaction
 
Note: corticosteroids are not indicated in the initial treatment of anaphylaxis. They may be administered once the
patient is stabilised to prevent recurrence in the short term (prednisolone PO: 0.5 to 1 mg/kg once daily for 1 to 2
days).Priority: restore vascular volume as quickly as possible: 
Insert 2 peripheral IV lines (2 catheters 16G in adults).
Ringer lactate or 0.9% sodium chloride: replace 3 times the estimated losses
and/or plasma substitute: replace 1.5 times the estimated losses
Transfuse: classically once estimated blood loss represents approximately 30 to 40% of blood volume (25% in
children). The blood must be tested (HIV, hepatitis B and C, syphilis, malaria in endemic areas, etc.) 
Urgently restore circulating volume using IV therapy with Ringer lactate:
Children under 5 years: 20 ml/kg over 15 minutes (to be repeated 2 times if necessary) then 70 ml/kg over 3 hours
Children 5 years and over and adults: 30 ml/kg over 30 minutes (to be repeated once if necessary) then 70 ml/kg
over 3 hours
As soon as the patient is able to drink (often within 2 hours), provide oral rehydration solution (ORS) as the patient
tolerates.
Closely monitor the patient; be careful to avoid ﬂuid overload in young children and elderly patients.
For aetiological treatment, see Acute diarrhoea, Chapter 3.
Determine the causal agent and remove it, e.g. stop ongoing injections or infusions, but if in place, maintain the IV
line.
Administer epinephrine (adrenaline) IM, into the anterolateral part of the thigh, in the event of hypotension,
pharyngolaryngeal oedema, or breathing difﬁculties:
Use undiluted solution (1:1000 = 1 mg/ml) and a 1 ml syringe graduated in 0.01 ml:
Children under 6 years: 0.15 ml
Children from 6 to 12 years: 0.3 ml
Children over 12 years and adults: 0.5 ml
In children, if 1 ml syringe is not available, use a diluted solution, i.e. add 1 mg epinephrine to 9 ml of 0.9% sodium
chloride to obtain a 0.1 mg/ml solution (1:10 000):
Children under 6 years: 1.5 ml
Children from 6 to 12 years: 3 ml
At the same time, administer rapidly Ringer lactate or 0.9% sodium chloride: 1 litre in adults (maximum rate); 20
ml/kg in children, to be repeated if necessary.
If there is no clinical improvement, repeat IM epinephrine every 5 to 15 minutes.
In shock persists after 3 IM injections, administration of IV epinephrine at a constant rate by a syringe pump is
necessary:
Use a diluted solution, i.e. add 1 mg epinephrine (1:1000) to 9 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride to obtain a 0.1 mg/ml
solution (1:10 000):
Children: 0.1 to 1 microgram/kg/minute
Adults: 0.05 to 0.5 microgram/kg/minute
If syringe pump is not available, see box.
In patients with bronchospasm, epinephrine is usually effective. If the spasm persists give 10 puffs of
inhaled salbutamol.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Septic shock
 
 
ampicillin IV
Children over 1 month: 50 mg/kg every 6 to 8 hours 
Adults: 1 to 2 g every 6 to 8 hours
 
cloxacillin IV infusion (60 minutes)
Children over 1 month: 50 mg/kg every 6 hours (max. 8 g daily)
Adults: 3 g every 6 hours
 
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) slow IV injection (3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes)
Doses are expressed in amoxicillin:
Children less than 3 months: 50 mg/kg every 12 hours
Children ≥ 3 months and < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg every 8 hours (max. 6 g daily)
Children 40 kg and adults: 2 g every 8 hours
 Vascular ﬂuid replacement with Ringer lactate or 0.9% sodium chloride or plasma substitute.
Use of vasoconstrictors:
dopamine IV at a constant rate by syringe pump (see box): 10 to 20 micrograms/kg/minute
or
epinephrine IV at a constant rate by syringe pump:
Use a diluted solution, i.e. add 1 mg epinephrine (1:1000) to 9 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride to obtain a 0.1 mg/ml
solution (1:10 000). Start with 0.1 microgram/kg/minute. Increase the dose progressively until a clinical improvement
is seen.
If syringe pump is not available, see box.
Look for the origin of the infection (abscess; ENT, pulmonary, digestive, gynaecological or urological infection etc.).
Antibiotic therapy according to the origin of infection:
Origin Antibiotic therapy Alternative
Cutaneous
staphylococci, streptococci cloxacillin + gentamicin 
Pulmonary
pneumococci, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae ampicillin or ceftriaxone
+/- gentamicinco-amoxiclav or ceftriaxone
+ ciproﬂoxacin
Intestinal or biliary
enterobacteria, anaerobic bacteria,
enterococcico-amoxiclav + gentamicin ceftriaxone + gentamicin
+ metronidazole
Gynaecological 
streptococci, gonococci, anaerobic bacteria,
E. colico-amoxiclav + gentamicin ceftriaxone + gentamicin
+ metronidazole
Urinary
enterobacteria, enterococci ampicillin + gentamicin ceftriaxone + ciproﬂoxacin
Other or undetermined ampicillin + gentamicin ceftriaxone + ciproﬂoxacin
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
ceftriaxone slow IV (3 minutes) 
Children: 100 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 2 g once daily
 
ciproﬂoxacin PO (by nasogastric tube)
Children: 15 mg/kg 2 times daily
Adults: 500 mg 2 times daily
 
gentamicin IM or slow IV (3 minutes) 
Children ≥ 1 month and adults: 6 mg/kg once daily
 
metronidazole IV infusion (30 minutes)
Children over 1 month: 10 mg/kg every 8 hours (max. 1500 mg daily)
Adults: 500 mg every 8 hours
 
Cardiogenic shock
The objective is to restore efﬁcient cardiac output. The treatment of cardiogenic shock depends on its mechanism.
Requires immediate pericardial tap after restoration of circulating volume.
 
  a 
Corticosteroids: not recommended, the adverse effects outweigh the beneﬁts.
Acute left heart failure with pulmonary oedema
Acute pulmonary oedema (for treatment, see Heart failure in adults, Chapter 12).
In the event of worsening signs with vascular collapse, use a strong cardiotonic:
dopamine IV at a constant rate by syringe pump (see box): 3 to 10 micrograms/kg/minute
Once the haemodynamic situation allows (normal BP, reduction in the signs of peripheral circulatory failure),
nitrates or morphine may be cautiously introduced.
Digoxin should no longer be used for cardiogenic shock, except in the rare cases when a supraventricular
tachycardia has been diagnosed by ECG. Correct hypoxia before using digoxin.
digoxin slow IV
Adults: one injection of 0.25 to 0.5 mg, then 0.25 mg 3 or 4 times per 24 hours if necessary
Children: one injection of 0.010 mg/kg (10 micrograms/kg), to be repeated up to 4 times per 24 hours if
necessary
Cardiac tamponade: restricted cardiac ﬁlling as a result of haemopericardium or pericarditis.
Tension pneumothorax: drainage of the pneumothorax.
Symptomatic pulmonary embolism: treat with an anticoagulant in a hospital setting.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 Administration of dopamine or epinephrine at a constant rate requires the following conditions: 
close medical supervision in a hospital setting;
 
Example: 
dopamine: 10 micrograms/kg/minute in a patient weighing 60 kg 
Hourly dose: 10 (micrograms) x 60 (kg) x 60 (min) = 36 000 micrograms/hour = 36 mg/hour 
In a 50 ml syringe, dilute one 200 mg-ampoule of dopamine with 0.9% sodium chloride to obtain 50 ml of solution
containing 4 mg of dopamine per ml. 
For a dose of 36 mg/hour, administer the solution (4 mg/ml) at 9 ml/hour.
 
If there is no electric syringe pump, dilution in an infusion bag may be considered. However, it is important to
consider the risks related to this type of administration (accidental bolus or insufﬁcient dose). The infusion must
be constantly monitored to prevent any, even small, change from the prescribed rate of administration.
 
Example for epinephrine:
Dilute 1 ampoule of 1 mg epinephrine (1000 micrograms) in 100 ml of 5% glucose or 0.9% sodium chloride to
obtain a solution containing 10 micrograms of epinephrine per ml. 
For administration, use a paediatric infusion set; knowing that 1 ml = 60 drops, in a child weighing 10 kg:
 
Note: account for all infused volumes when recording ins and outs.
 
 use of a dedicated vein (no other infusion/injection in this vein), avoid the antecubital fossa if possible;
use of an electric syringe pump;
progressive increase and adaptation of doses according to clinical response;
intensive monitoring of drug administration, particularly during syringe changes.
In adults: 
Dilute 10 ampoules of 1 mg epinephrine (10 000 micrograms) in 1 litre of 5% glucose or 0.9% sodium chloride
to obtain a solution containing 10 micrograms of epinephrine per ml. 
Knowing that 1 ml = 20 drops, in an adult weighing 50 kg:
0.1 microgram/kg/minute = 5 micrograms/minute = 10 drops/minute
1 microgram/kg/minute = 50 micrograms/minute = 100 drops/minute, etc.
In children:
0.1 microgram/kg/minute = 1 microgram/minute = 6 drops/minute
0.2 microgram/kg/minute = 2 micrograms/minute = 12 drops/minute, etc.
Footnotes
(a)The solvent of ceftriaxone for IM injection contains lidocaine. Ceftriaxone reconstituted using this solvent must never be
administered by IV route. For IV administration, water for injection must always be used.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Seizures
Involuntary movements of cerebral origin (stiffness followed by clonic movements), accompanied by a loss of
consciousness, and often urinary incontinence (generalized tonic-clonic seizures).
In pregnant women, eclamptic seizures require speciﬁc medical and obstetrical care. Refer to the guide Essential
obstetric and newborn care, MSF. 
Initial treatment
During a seizure
diazepam
Children: 0.5 mg/kg preferably rectally without exceeding 10 mg
IV administration is possible (0.3 mg/kg over 2 or 3 minutes), only if means of ventilation are available (Ambu bag and
mask).
Adults: 10 mg rectally or by slow IV
 
In all cases:
The patient is no longer seizing
Status epilepticus
Several distinct seizures without complete restoration of consciousness in between or an uninterrupted seizure lasting
more than 30 minutes.
 
There is a high risk of hypotension, bradycardia and respiratory depression, especially in children and elderly
patients. Never administer these drugs by rapid IV injection. Monitor heart rate, blood pressure and respiratory
rate every 15 minutes during and after administration. Reduce the infusion rate in the event of a drop in blood
pressure or bradycardia. Ensure that respiratory support (Ambu bag via face mask or intubation, etc.) and IV
solutions for ﬂuid replacement are ready at hand. 
 Protect from trauma, maintain airway, place patient in ‘recovery position’, loosen clothing.
Most seizures are quickly self-limited. Immediate administration of an anticonvulsant is not systematic. If
generalized seizure lasts more than 5 minutes, use diazepam to stop it: 
 a 
If seizure continues, repeat dose once after 10 minutes.
In infants and elderly patients, monitor respiratory rate and blood pressure.
If seizure continues after the second dose, treat as status epilepticus.
Look for the cause of the seizure and evaluate the risk of recurrence.
Keep diazepam and glucose available in case the patient starts seizing again.
Protect from trauma, loosen clothing, maintain airway and administer oxygen as required.
Insert an intravenous or intraosseus line.
Treat for hypoglycaemia (see Hypoglycaemia, Chapter 1).
 If 2 doses of diazepam have not stopped the seizures, use phenytoin or phenobarbital if phenytoin is not available
or if seizures persist despite phenytoin.
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Further treatment
Febrile seizures
Infectious causes
Severe malaria (Chapter 6), meningitis (Chapter 7), meningo-encephalitis, cerebral toxoplasmosis (HIV infection and
AIDS, Chapter 8), cysticercosis (Cestodes, Chapter 6), etc.
Metabolic causesphenytoin
slow IV
infusion
250 mg in 5 ml
ampoule
(50 mg/ml) 
For example:
Child weighing 8 kg: 160 mg (20 mg x 8 kg), i.e. 3.2 ml of phenytoin in 17 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride
over 30 minutes
Adult weighing 50 kg: 1 g (20 mg x 50 kg), i.e. 20 ml of phenytoin in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium
chloride over 30 minutes
 
Do not dilute phenytoin in glucose. Do not administer via a line used for glucose solution
administration. Use a large catheter. Check the insertion site and for blood backﬂow (risk of
necrosis in the event of extravasation). After each infusion, rinse with 0.9% sodium chloride
to limit local venous irritation.Children 1 month and over and adults: one dose of 15 to 20 mg/kg administered over 20 minutes
minimum and 60 minutes maximum
The concentration of the diluted solution should be between 5 and 10 mg/ml. The infusion rate
should not exceed 1 mg/kg/minute or 50 mg/minute (25 mg/minute in elderly patients or patients
with cardiac disorders).
 
 
phenobarbital
slow IV
infusion
200 mg in 1 ml
ampoule
(200 mg/ml)
 
For example:
Child weighing 8 kg: 120 mg (15 mg x 8 kg), i.e. 0.6 ml of phenobarbital in 20 ml of 0.9% sodium
chloride over 20 minutes
Adult weighing 50 kg: 500 mg (10 mg x 50 kg), i.e. 2.5 ml of phenobarbital in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9%
sodium chloride over 20 minutes
 
For doses less than 1 ml, use a 1 ml syringe graduated 0.01 ml to draw the phenobarbital.Children 1 month to < 12 years: one dose of 15 to 20 mg/kg (max. 1 g) administered over 20
minutes minimum
If necessary, a second dose of 10 mg/kg may be administered 15 to 30 minutes after the ﬁrst
dose.
Children ≥ 12 years and adults: one dose of 10 mg/kg (max. 1 g) administered over 20 minutes
minimum
If necessary, a second dose of 5 to 10 mg/kg may be administered 15 to 30 minutes after the
ﬁrst dose.
Do not administer more than 1 mg/kg/minute.
 
 
Determine the cause of the fever. Give paracetamol (see Fever, Chapter 1).
In children under 3 years, there is usually no risk of later complications after simple febrile seizures and no treatment
is required after the crisis. For further febrile episodes, give paracetamol PO.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Hypoglycaemia: administer glucose by slow IV injection to all patients who do not regain consciousness, to patients
with severe malaria and to newborns and malnourished children. When possible, conﬁrm hypoglycaemia (reagent
strip test).
Iatrogenic causes
Withdrawal of antiepileptic therapy in a patient being treated for epilepsy should be managed over a period of 4-6
months with progressive reduction of the doses. An abrupt stop of treatment may provoke severe recurrent seizures.
Epilepsy
For information:
 A ﬁrst brief seizure does not need further protective treatment. Only patients with chronic repetitive seizures require
further regular protective treatment with an antiepileptic drug, usually over several years.
Once a diagnosis is made, abstention from treatment may be recommended due to the risks associated with
treatment. However, these risks must be balanced with the risks of aggravation of the epilepsy, ensuing seizure-
induced cerebral damage and other injury if the patient is not treated.
It is always preferable to start with monotherapy. The effective dose must be reached progressively and symptoms
and drug tolerance evaluated every 15 to 20 days.
An abrupt interruption of treatment may provoke status epilepticus. The rate of dose reduction varies according to
the length of treatment; the longer the treatment period, the longer the reduction period (see Iatrogenic causes). In
the same way, a change from one antiepileptic drug to another must be made progressively with an overlap period
of a few weeks.
First line treatments for generalised tonic-clonic seizures in children under 2 years are carbamazepine or
phenobarbital, in older children and adults sodium valproate or carbamazepine.
sodium valproate PO
Adults: initial dose of 300 mg 2 times daily; increase by 200 mg every 3 days if necessary until the optimal dose
has been reached (usually 500 mg to 1 g 2 times daily).
Children over 20 kg: initial dose of 200 mg 2 times daily irrespective of weight; increase the dose progressively
if necessary until the optimal dose has been reached (usually 10 to 15 mg/kg 2 times daily).
carbamazepine PO
Adults: initial dose of 100 to 200 mg once or 2 times daily; increase the dose every week by 100 to 200 mg, up
to 400 mg 2 to 3 times daily (max. 1600 mg daily) 
Children 1 month and over: initial dose of 5 mg/kg once daily or 2.5 mg/kg 2 times daily; increase the dose every
week by 2.5 to 5 mg/kg, up to 5 mg/kg 2 to 3 times daily (max. 20 mg/kg daily) 
phenobarbital PO
Adults: initial dose of 2 mg/kg once daily (max. 100 mg); increase the dose progressively up to 6 mg/kg daily if
necessary
Children: initial dose of 3 to 4 mg/kg once daily at bedtime; increase the dose progressively up to 8 mg/kg daily if
necessary
Footnotes
(a)For rectal administration, use a syringe without a needle, or cut a nasogastric tube, CH8, to a length of 2-3 cm and attach it
to the tip of the syringe.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Hypoglycaemia
Last update: November 2022
 
Hypoglycaemia is an abnormally low concentration of blood glucose. Severe hypoglycaemia can be fatal or lead to
irreversible neurological damage.
Blood glucose levels should be measured whenever possible in patients presenting symptoms of hypoglycaemia. If
hypoglycaemia is suspected but blood glucose measurement is not available, glucose (or another available sugar)
should be given empirically.
Always consider hypoglycaemia in patients presenting impaired consciousness (lethargy, coma) or seizures.
For diagnosis and treatment of hypoglycaemia in neonates, refer to the guide Essential obstetric and newborn care,
MSF.
Clinical features
Rapid onset of non-speciﬁc signs, mild to severe depending on the degree of the hypoglycaemia: sensation of hunger
and fatigue, tremors, tachycardia, pallor, sweats, anxiety, blurred vision, difﬁculty speaking, confusion, convulsions,
lethargy, coma.
Diagnosis
Capillary blood glucose concentration (reagent strip test):
 
If blood glucose measurement is not available, diagnosis is conﬁrmed when symptoms resolve after the administration
of sugar or glucose.
Symptomatic treatment
Children: a teaspoon of powdered sugar in a few ml of water or 50 ml of fruit juice, maternal or therapeutic milk or
10 ml/kg of 10% glucose by oral route or nasogastric tube.
Adults: 15 to 20 g of sugar (3 or 4 cubes) or sugar water, fruit juice, soda, etc.
Symptoms improve approximately 15 minutes after taking sugar by oral route.
Children: 2 ml/kg of 10% glucose by slow IV (2 to 3 minutes) 
Adults: 1 ml/kg of 50% glucose by slow IV (3 to 5 minutes)
Neurological symptoms improve a few minutes after the injection.
 
Check blood glucose after 15 minutes. If it is still low, re-administer glucose by IV route or sugar by oral route according
to the patient’s clinical condition.
If there is no clinical improvement, differential diagnoses should be considered: e.g. serious infection (severe malaria,
meningitis, etc.), epilepsy, unintentional alcohol intoxication or adrenal insufﬁciency in children.
In all cases, after stabilisation, give a meal or snack rich in complex carbohydrates and monitor the patients for a few
hours.Non-diabetic patients:
Hypoglycaemia: < 3.3 mmol/litre (< 60 mg/dl)
Severe hypoglycaemia: < 2.2 mmol/litre (< 40 mg/dl)
Diabetic patients on home treatment: < 3.9 mmol/litre (< 70 mg/dl) [1]
Conscious patients:
Patients with impaired consciousness or prolonged convulsions:
 a 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
If patient does not return to full alertness after an episode of severe hypoglycaemia, monitor blood glucose levels
regularly.
Aetiological treatment
 
ReferencesOther than diabetes:
Treat severe malnutrition, neonatal sepsis, severe malaria, acute alcohol intoxication, etc.
End prolonged fast.
Replace drugs inducing hypoglycaemia (e.g. quinine IV, pentamidine, ciproﬂoxacin, enalapril, beta-blockers, high-
dose aspirin, tramadol), or anticipate hypoglycaemia (e.g. administer quinine IV in a glucose infusion).
In diabetic patients:
Avoid missing meals, increase intake of carbohydrates if necessary.
Adjust dosage of insulin according to blood glucose levels and physical activity.
Adjust dosage of oral antidiabetics, taking into account possible drug interactions.
Footnotes
(a)If ready-made 10% glucose solution is not available: remove 100 ml of 5% glucose from a 500 ml bottle or bag, then add 50
ml of 50% glucose to the remaining 400 ml of 5% glucose to obtain 450 ml of 10% glucose solution.
1.American Diabetes Association Standards of Medical Care in Diabetes, 2017.
http://care.diabetesjournals.org/content/diacare/suppl/2016/12/15/40.Supplement_1.DC1/DC_40_S1_ﬁnal.pdf [Accessed 24
May 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Fever
Fever is deﬁned as an axillary temperature higher than or equal to 37.5 °C.
Fever is frequently due to infection. In a febrile patient, ﬁrst look for signs of serious illness then, try to establish a
diagnosis.
Signs of severity
Infectious causes of fever according to localizing symptoms
 Severe tachycardia, tachypnoea, respiratory distress, SpO ≤ 90%. 2
Shock, altered mental status, petechial or purpuric rash, meningeal signs, seizures, heart murmur, severe abdominal
pain, dehydration, critically ill appearance; a bulging fontanel in young children.  a 
Signs or symptoms Possible aetiology
Meningeal signs, seizures Meningitis/meningoencephalitis/severe malaria
Abdominal pain or peritoneal signs Appendicitis/peritonitis/typhoid fever
Diarrhoea, vomiting Gastroenteritis/typhoid fever
Jaundice, enlarged liver Viral hepatitis
Cough Pneumonia/measles/tuberculosis if persistent
Ear pain, red tympanic membrane Otitis media
Sore throat, enlarged lymph nodes Streptococcal pharyngitis, diphtheria
Dysuria, urinary frequency, back pain Urinary tract infection
Red, warm, painful skin Erysipelas, cellulitis, abscess
Limp, difﬁculty walking Osteomyelitis/septic arthritis
Rash Measles/dengue/haemorrhagic fever/chikungunya
Bleeding (petechiae, epistaxis, etc.) Dengue/haemorrhagic fever
Joint pain Rheumatic fever/chikungunya/dengue
In endemic area, always consider malaria.
If the patient is ill appearingand has a persistent fever, consider HIV infection and tuberculosis, according to
clinical presentation. a This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Laboratory and other examinations
According to clinical presentation.
Aetiological treatment
For antibiotic doses according to age, see Acute pneumonia, Chapter 2.
Symptomatic treatment
paracetamol PO 
Children less than 1 month: 10 mg/kg 3 to 4 times daily (max. 40 mg/kg daily)
Children 1 month and over: 15 mg/kg 3 to 4 times daily (max. 60 mg/kg daily)
Adults: 1 g 3 to 4 times daily (max. 4 g daily)
or
ibuprofen PO
Children over 3 months and < 12 years: 5 to 10 mg/kg 3 to 4 times daily (max. 30 mg/kg daily)
Children 12 years and over and adults: 200 to 400 mg 3 to 4 times daily (max. 1200 mg daily)
or
acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) PO
Children over 16 years and adults: 500 mg to 1 g 3 to 4 times daily (max. 4 g daily)
Prevention of complications
 
Notes:Children less than 2 months with a temperature higher than or equal to 37.5 °C without a focus:
Urinary dipstick;
Lumbar puncture (LP) if child less than 1 month or if any of the following: meningeal signs, coma, seizures,
critically ill appearance, failure of prior antibiotic therapy, suspicion of staphylococcal infection;  a 
Chest X-Ray (if available) in case of signs of respiratory disease.
Children 2 months to 3 years with a temperature higher than or equal to 38 °C without a focus:
Urine dipstick;
White blood cell count (WBC) if available;
LP if meningeal signs.
Children over 3 years and adults with a temperature higher than or equal to 39 °C:
Antibiotherapy according to the cause of fever.
For patients with sickle cell disease, see Sickle cell disease, Chapter 12.
If no source of infection is found, hospitalise and treat the following children with empiric antibiotics:
Children less than 1 month;
Children 1 month to 3 years with WBC ≥ 15000 or ≤ 5000 cells/mm;3
All critically ill appearing patients or those with signs of serious illness;  a 
Undress the patient. Do not wrap children in wet towels or cloths (not effective, increases discomfort, risk of
hypothermia).
Antipyretics may increase the patient’s comfort but they do not prevent febrile convulsions. Do not treat for more
than 3 days with antipyretics.
Encourage oral hydration. Continue frequent breastfeeding in infants.
Look for signs of dehydration.
Monitor urine output.
In pregnant or breast-feeding women use paracetamol only.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 In case of haemorrhagic fever and dengue: acetylsalicylic acid and ibuprofen are contraindicated; use paracetamol
with caution in the presence of hepatic dysfunction.
Footnotes
(a)Critically ill appearing child: weak grunting or crying, drowsiness, difﬁcult to arrouse, does not smile, unconjugate or anxious
gaze, pallor or cyanosis, general hypotonia.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Pain
Pain results from a variety of pathological processes. It is expressed differently by each patient depending on cultural
background, age, etc. It is a subjective experience meaning that only the individual is able to assess his/her level of pain.
Regular assessment of the intensity of pain is indispensable in establishing effective treatment.
Clinical features
Pain assessment
Clinical examination
Synthesis
The synthesis of information gathered during history taking and clinical examination allows aetiological diagnosis and
orients treatment. It is important to distinguish:
Pain evaluation scales
Self-evaluation scale - Children over 5 years and adults
Simple verbal scale (SVS)Intensity: use a simple verbal scale in children over 5 years and adults, and NFCS or FLACC scales in children less
than 5 years (see Pain evaluation scales).
Pattern: sudden, intermittent, chronic; at rest, at night, on movement, during care procedures, etc.
Character: burning, cramping, spasmodic, radiating, etc.
Aggravating or relieving factors, etc.
Of the organ or area where the pain is located.
Speciﬁc signs of underlying disease (e.g. bone or osteoarticular pain may be caused by a vitamin C deﬁciency) and
review of all systems.
Associated signs (fever, weight loss, etc.).
Nociceptive pain: it presents most often as acute pain and the cause-effect relationship is usually obvious (e.g.
acute post-operative pain, burns, trauma, renal colic, etc.). The pain may be present in different forms, but
neurological exam is normal. Treatment is relatively well standardized.
Neuropathic pain, due to a nerve lesion (section, stretching, ischaemia): most often chronic pain. On a background
of constant, more or less localized pain, such as paraesthesia or burning, there are recurrent acute attacks such as
electric shock-like pain, frequently associated with disordered sensation (anaesthesia, hypo or hyperaesthesia).
This type of pain is linked to viral infections directly affecting the CNS (herpes simplex, herpes zoster), neural
compression by tumors, post- amputation pain, paraplegia, etc.
Mixed pain (cancer, HIV) for which management requires a broader approach.
Intensity
of painNo 
painMild
painModerate
painSevere pain
Scoring 0 1 2 3
Write down 0 + ++ +++This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Observational evaluation scale - Children 2 months-5 years
FLACC scale (Face Limb Activity Cry Consolability)
 
Each category is scored from 0 to 2, giving a ﬁnal score between 0 and 10.
0 to 3: mild pain, 4 to 7: moderate pain, 7 to 10: severe pain
Observational evaluation scale - Children under 2 months
NFCS scale (Neonatal Facial Coding System)
 
A score of 2 or more signiﬁes signiﬁcant pain, requiring analgesic treatment.
Treatment
Treatment depends on the type and intensity of the pain. It may be both aetiological and symptomatic if a treatable
cause is identiﬁed. Treatment is symptomatic only in other cases (no cause found, non-curable disease). 
ItemsScoring
0 1 2
Face No particular
expression or smileOccasional grimace or frown, withdrawn,
disinterestedFrequent to constant frown,
clenched jaw, quivering chin
Legs Normal position or
relaxedUneasy, restless, tense Kicking, or legs drawn up
Activity Lying quietly, normal
position, moves easilySquirming, shifting back and forth, tense Arched, rigid or jerking
Cry No cry (awake or
asleep)Moans or whimpers, occasional
complaintCrying steadily, screams or
sobs, frequent complaints
ConsolabilityContent, relaxed Reassured by occasional touching,
hugging or being talked to, distractibleDifﬁcult to console or comfort
 
ItemsScoring
0 1
Brow bulge no yes
Eye squeeze no yes
Nasolabial furrow no yes
Open lips no yesThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Nociceptive pain
The WHO classiﬁes analgesics used for this type of pain on a three-step ladder:
 
The treatment of pain is based on a few fundamental concepts:
Treatment of acute pain
 Step 1: non-opioid analgesics such as paracetamol and nonsteroidal anti-inﬂammatory drugs (NSAIDs).
Step 2: weak opioid analgesics such as codeine and tramadol. Their combination with one or two Step 1 analgesics
is recommended.
Step 3: strong opioid analgesics, ﬁrst and foremost morphine. Their combination with one or two Step 1 analgesics
is recommended.
Pain can only be treated correctly if it is correctly evaluated. The only person who can evaluate the intensity of pain
is the patient himself. The use of pain assessment scales is invaluable.
The pain evaluation observations should be recorded in the patient chart in the same fashion as other vital signs.
Treatment of pain should be as prompt as possible.
It is recommended to administer analgesics in advance when appropriate (e.g. before painful care procedures).
Analgesics should be prescribed and administered at ﬁxed time intervals (not on demand).
Oral forms should be used whenever possible.
The combination of different analgesic drugs (multimodal analgesia) is advantageous.
Start with an analgesic from the level presumed most effective: e.g., in the event of a fractured femur, start with a
Step 3 analgesic.
The treatment and dose chosen are guided by the assessment of pain intensity, but also by the patient’s response
which may vary signiﬁcantly from one person to another.
Mild pain Paracetamol + /- NSAID
Moderate pain Paracetamol + /- NSAID + tramadol or codeine
Severe pain Paracetamol + /- NSAID + morphine
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Analgesics ChildrenAdults (except
pregnant/breast-feeding
women)Remarks
Level
1paracetamol
PO< 1 month: 10 mg/kg
every 6 to 8 hours (max.
40 mg/kg daily)
≥ 1 month: 15 mg/kg
every 6 to 8 hours (max.
60 mg/kg daily)
 1 g every 6 to 8 hours (max.
4 g daily)The efﬁcacy of IV paracetamol
is not superior to the efﬁcacy of
oral paracetamol; the IV route is
restricted to situations where
oral administration is impossible.
paracetamol
IV< 1 month: 7.5 mg/kg
every 6 hours (max. 30
mg/kg daily)
≥ 1 month and < 10 kg: 10
mg/kg every 6 hours (max.
30 mg/kg daily)
≥ 10 kg: 15 mg/kg every 6
hours (max. 60 mg/kg
daily)< 50 kg: 15 mg/kg every 6
hours (max. 60 mg/kg daily)
≥ 50 kg: 1 g every 6 hours
(max. 4 g daily)
acetylsalicylic
acid (aspirin)
PO– 300 mg to 1 g every 4 to 6
hours (max. 4 g daily)Avoid in children less than 16
years.
diclofenac IM – 75 mg once daily Treatment must be as short as
possible.
Respect contra-indications. ibuprofen PO > 3 months: 5 to 10 mg/kg
every 6 to 8 hours (max.
30 mg/kg daily)
> 12 years: as for adults200 to 400 mg every 6 to 8
hours (max. 1200 mg daily)
Level
2
 
 codeine PO > 12 years: 30 to 60 mg
every 4 to 6 hours (max.
240 mg daily)30 to 60 mg every 4 to 6
hours (max. 240 mg daily)Add a laxative if treatment > 48
hours.
tramadol PO > 12 years: 50 to 100 mg
every 4 to 6 hours (max.
400 mg daily)50 to 100 mg every 4 to 6
hours (max. 400 mg daily) 
25 to 50 mg every 12 hours in
elderly patients and in patients
with severe renal or hepatic
impairment.
 tramadol IM,
slow IV or
infusion> 12 years: 50 to 100 mg
every 4 to 6 hours (max.
600 mg daily)50 to 100 mg every 4 to 6
hours (max. 600 mg daily)
Level
3morphine PO
immediate
release (MIR)> 6 months: 0.15 mg/kg
every 4 hours, to be
ajusted in relation to pain
intensity10 mg every 4 hours, to be
ajusted in relation to pain
intensity• Reduce the dose by half in
elderly patients and patients
with renal or hepatic impairment.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Notes on the use of morphine and derivatives:
The RR should remain equal to or greater than the thresholds indicated below:
 
Respiratory depression must be identiﬁed and treated quickly: verbal and physical stimulation of the patient;
administration of oxygen; respiratory support (bag and mask) if necessary. If no improvement, administer naloxone
(antagonist of morphine) in bolus to be repeated every minute until RR normalises and the excessive drowsiness
resolves: 5 micrograms/kg in children and 1 to 3 micrograms/kg in adults.• Add a laxative if treatment >
48 hours.
morphine PO
sustained
release (MSR)The daily dose is
determined during the
initial treatment with
immediate release
morphine (MIR).
If treatment is initiated
directly with MSR:
> 6 months: 0.5 mg/kg
every 12 hours, to be
ajusted in relation to pain
intensityThe daily dose is
determined during the initial
treatment with immediate
release morphine (MIR).
If treatment is initiated
directly with MSR:
30 mg every 12 hours, to
be ajusted in relation to
pain intensity• Do not initiate treatment with
the MSR in elderly patients and
patients with renal or hepatic
impairment. Begin treatment
with MIR.
• Add a laxative if treatment >
48 hours.
morphine SC,
IM> 6 months: 0.1 to 0.2
mg/kg every 4 hours0.1 to 0.2 mg/kg every 4
hours• Reduce doses by half and
administer less frequently,
according to clinical response, in
elderly patients and patients
with severe renal or hepatic
impairment.
• Add a laxative if treatment >
48 hours.morphine IV > 6 months: 0.1 mg/kg
administered in
fractionated doses (0.05
mg/kg every 10 minutes)
every 4 hours if necessary0.1 mg/kg administered in
fractionated doses (0.05
mg/kg every 10 minutes)
every 4 hours if necessary
Morphine is an effective treatment for many types of severe pain. Its analgesic effect is dosedependent. Its
adverse effects have often been exaggerated and should not be an obstacle to its use.
The most serious adverse effect of morphine is respiratory depression, which may be fatal. This adverse effect
results from overdose. It is, therefore, important to increase doses gradually. Respiratory depression is preceded by
drowsiness, which is a warning to monitor respiratory rate (RR). 
Children 1 to 12 months RR ≥ 25 respirations/minute
Children 1 to 2 years RR ≥ 20 respirations/minute
Children 2 to 5 years RR ≥ 15 respirations/minute
Children > 5 years and adults RR ≥ 10 respirations/minute
Morphine and codeine always cause constipation. A laxative should be prescribed if the opioid treatment continues
more than 48 hours. Lactulose PO is the drug of choice: children < 1 year: 5 ml daily; children 1-6 years: 5 to 10 ml
daily; children 7-14 years: 10 to 15 ml daily; adults: 15 to 45 ml daily.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
If the patient’s stools are soft, a stimulant laxative (bisacodyl PO: children > 3 years: 5 to 10 mg once daily; adults:
10 to 15 mg once daily) is preferred.
Children:
ondansetron PO: 0.15 mg/kg (max. 4 mg per dose) up to 3 times daily
Do not use metoclopramide in children.
Adults:
haloperidol PO (2 mg/ml oral solution): 1 to 2 mg up to 6 times daily or metoclopramide PO: 5 to 10 mg 3 times
daily with an interval of at least 6 hours between each dose
Do not combine haloperidol and metoclopramide.
Treatment of nociceptive pain in pregnant and breast-feeding women
Neuropathic painNausea and vomiting are common at the beginning of treatment.
For chronic pain in late stage disease (cancer, AIDS etc.), morphine PO is the drug of choice. It may be necessary to
increase doses over time according to pain assessment. Do not hesitate to give sufﬁcient and effective doses.
Morphine, tramadol and codeine have similar modes of action and should not be combined.
Buprenorphine, nalbuphine and pentazocine must not be combined with morphine, pethidine, tramadol or codeine
because they have competitive action.
AnalgesicsPregnancy
Breast-feeding
0-5
monthsFrom 6 monthth
 
Level
1paracetamol ﬁrst
choiceﬁrst choice ﬁrst choice
aspirin avoid contra-indicated avoid
ibuprofen avoid contra-indicated possible
 
 
 
Level
2codeine possibleThe neonate may develop withdrawal
symptoms, respiratory depression and
drowsiness in the event of prolonged
administration of large doses at the
end of the thirdtrimester. Closely
monitor the neonate.Use with caution, for a short period
(2-3 days), at the lowest effective
dose. Monitor the mother and the
child: in the event of excessive
drowsiness, stop treatment.
tramadol possibleThe child may develop drowsiness when the mother receives tramadol at the
end of the thirdtrimester and during breast-feeding. Administer with caution, for
a short period, at the lowest effective dose, and monitor the child.
 
Level
3morphine possibleThe child may develop withdrawal symptoms, respiratory depression and
drowsiness when the mother receives morphine at the end of the third trimester
and during breast-feeding.
Administer with caution, for a short period, at the lowest effective dose, and
monitor the child.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Commonly used analgesics are often ineffective in treating this type of pain.
Treatment of neuropathic pain is based on a combination of two centrally acting drugs:
amitriptyline PO
Adults: 25 mg once daily at bedtime (Week 1); 50 mg once daily at bedtime (Week 2); 75 mg once daily at bedtime (as
of Week 3); max.150 mg daily. Reduce the dose by half in elderly patients.
carbamazepine PO
Adults: 200 mg once daily at bedtime (Week 1); 200 mg 2 times daily (Week 2); 200 mg 3 times daily (as of Week 3)
Given its teratogenic risk, carbamazepine should only be used in women of childbearing age when covered
by effective contraception (intrauterine device or injectable progestogen). It is not recommended in pregnant women.
Mixed pain
In mixed pain with a signiﬁcant component of nociceptive pain, such as in cancer or AIDS, morphine is combined with
antidepressants and antiepileptics.
Chronic pain
In contrast to acute pain, medical treatment alone is not always sufﬁcient in controlling chronic pain. A multidisciplinary
approach including medical treatment, physiotherapy, psychotherapy and nursing is often necessary to allow good pain
relief and encourage patient selfmanagement.
Co-analgesics
The combination of certain drugs may be useful or even essential in the treatment of pain: antispasmodics, muscle
relaxants, anxiolytics, corticosteroids, local anaesthesia, etc.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Anaemia
Anaemia is deﬁned as a haemoglobin (Hb) level below reference values, which vary depending on sex, age and
pregnancy status (see Table 2).
 
Anaemia may be caused by:
 
In tropical settings, the causes of anaemia are often interlinked.
Clinical features
Laboratory
 
Table 1 - Possible diagnoses with blood cell count
 Decreased production of red blood cells: iron deﬁciency, nutritional deﬁciencies (folic acid, vitamin B, vitamin A),
depressed bone marrow function, certain infections (HIV, visceral leishmaniasis), renal failure;12
Loss of red blood cells: acute or chronic haemorrhage (ancylostomiasis, schistosomiasis, etc.);
Increased destruction of red blood cells (haemolysis): parasitic (malaria), bacterial and viral (HIV) infections;
haemoglobinopathies (sickle cell disease, thalassaemia); intolerance to certain drugs (primaquine, dapsone, co-
trimoxazole, etc.) in patients with G6PD deﬁciency.
Common signs: pallor of the conjunctivae, mucous membranes, palms of hands and soles of feet; fatigue,
dizziness, dyspnoea, tachycardia, heart murmur.
Signs that anaemia may be immediately life threatening: sweating, thirst, cold extremities, oedema in the lower
limbs, respiratory distress, angina, shock.
Signiﬁcant signs: cheilosis and glossitis (nutritional deﬁciency), jaundice, hepatosplenomegaly, dark coloured urine
(haemolysis), bleeding (maelena, haematuria, etc.), signs of malaria.
Hb levels
Rapid test or systematic thick and thin blood ﬁlms in areas where malaria is endemic.
Urinary dipstick: check for haemoglobinuria or haematuria.
Emmel test if sickle cell disease is suspected.
Blood cell count if available to guide diagnosis.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Aetiological treatment
Anaemia in itself is not an indication for transfusion. Most anaemias are well tolerated and can be corrected with simple
aetiological treatment.
Aetiological treatment may be given alone or together with transfusion.
 
 
or preferably,
ferrous salts + folic acid  PO based on elemental iron dosages.Characteristics Possible diagnoses
Macrocytic  Deﬁciency (folic acid, vitamin B), chronic alcoholism 12
Microcytic Iron deﬁciency (malnutrition, chronic haemorrhage), chronic inﬂammation (HIV
infection, cancer), thalassaemia
Normocytic  Acute haemorrhage, renal failure, haemolysis
Reduced number of
reticulocytesDeﬁciency (iron, folic acid, vitamin B), spinal tumour, renal failure 12
Increased or normal number of
reticulocytesHaemolysis, sickle cell disease, thalassaemia
Eosinophilia Ancylostomiasis, trichuriasis, schistosomiasis, HIV infection, malignant
haemopathies
Iron deﬁciency
ferrous salts PO for 3 months. Doses are expressed in elemental iron:
Neonates: 1 to 2 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children 1 month to < 6 years: 1.5 to 3 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children 6 to < 12 years: 65 mg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 12 years and adults: 65 mg 2 to 3 times daily a 
Age WeightTreatment
45 mg/5 ml syrup 65 mg tablet
< 1 month < 4 kg 0.5 ml x 2 –
1 month to < 1 year 4 to < 10 kg 1.5 ml x 2 –
1 to < 6 years 10 to < 20 kg 2.5 ml x 2 –
6 to < 12 years 20 to < 40 kg – 1 tab x 2
Helminthic infections: see Schistosomiasis and Nematode infections (Chapter 6).
Folic acid deﬁciency (rarely isolated)
folic acid PO for 4 monthsThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Blood transfusion
Indications
To decide whether to transfuse, several parameters should be taken into account:
If transfusion is indicated, it should be carried out without delay. For transfusion thresholds, see Table 2.
Volume to be transfused
In the absence of hypovolaemia or shock:
Children < 20 kg: 15 ml/kg of red cell concentrate in 3 hours or 20 ml/kg of whole blood in 4 hours
Children ≥ 20 kg and adults: start with an adult unit of whole blood or red cell concentrate; do not exceed a transfusion
rate of 5 ml/kg/hour
Repeat if necessary, depending on clinical condition.
Monitoring
Monitor the patient’s condition and vital signs (heart rate, blood pressure, respiratory rate, temperature):
 
If signs of circulatory overload appear:
PreventionChildren < 1 year: 0.5 mg/kg once daily
Children ≥ 1 year and adults: 5 mg once daily
Malaria: see Malaria (Chapter 6). In the event of associated iron deﬁciency, wait 4 weeks after malaria treatment
before prescribing iron supplements.
Suspected haemolytic anaemia: stop any drug that causes haemolysis in patients with (or that may possibly have)
G6PD deﬁciency.
Clinical tolerance of anaemia
Underlying conditions (cardiovascular disease, infection, etc.)
Rate at which anaemia develops.
Hb levels
 b 
During the transfusion: 5 minutes after the start of transfusion, then every 15 minutes during the ﬁrst hour, then
every 30 minutes until the end of the transfusion.
After the transfusion: 4 to 6 hours after the end of the transfusion.
Stop temporarily the transfusion.
Sit the patient in an upright position.
Administer oxygen.
Administer furosemide by slow IV:
Children: 0.5 to 1 mg/kg
Adults: 20 to 40 mg
Repeat the injection (same dose) after 2 hours if necessary.
Once the patient has been stabilised, start the transfusion again after 30 minutes.
Iron (and folic acid) deﬁciency:
Drug supplements
ferrous salts PO as long as the risk of deﬁciency persists (e.g. pregnancy, malnutrition). Doses are expressed
in elemental iron:
Neonates: 4.5 mg once daily [1] This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
or preferably,
ferrous salts + folic acid PO based on elemental iron dosages.
 
Table 2 - Deﬁnition of anaemia and transfusion thresholds
 Children 1 month to < 12 years: 1 to 2 mg/kg once daily (max. 65 mg daily)
Children ≥ 12 years and adults: 65 mg once daily
Age WeightPrevention
45 mg/5 ml syrup 65 mg tablet
< 1 month < 4 kg 0.5 ml –
1 month to < 1 year 4 to < 10 kg 1 ml –
1 to < 6 years 10 to < 20 kg 2.5 ml –
6 to < 12 years 20 to < 40 kg 5 ml –
≥ 12 years and adults ≥ 40 kg – 1 tab
Nutritional supplements (if the basic diet is insufﬁcient)
In the event of sickle cell anaemia: see Sickle cell disease (Chapter 12).
Early treatment of malaria, helminthic infections, etc.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
ReferencesPatientsHb levels
deﬁning anaemiaTransfusion threshold
Children 2-6 months < 9.5 g/dl Hb < 4 g/dl, even if there are no signs of decompensation
Hb ≥ 4 g/dl and < 6 g/dl if there are signs of decompensation
or sickle cell disease or severe malaria or serious bacterial
infection or pre-existing heart diseaseChildren 6 months-5 years < 11 g/dl
Children 6-11 years < 11.5 g/dl
Children 12-14 years < 12 g/dl
Men < 12 g/dl Hb < 7 g/dl if there are signs of decompensation or sickle cell
disease or severe malaria or serious bacterial infection or
pre-existing heart disease Women < 13 g/dl
Pregnant women
 < 11 g/dl
(1 and 3
trimester)
< 10.5 g/dl
(2 trimester)
 st rd
nd< 36 weeks
Hb ≤ 5 g/dl, even if there are no signs of decompensation
Hb > 5 g/dl and < 7 g/dl if there are signs of decompensation
or sickle cell disease or severe malaria or serious bacterial
infection or pre-existing heart disease
≥ 36 weeks
Hb ≤ 6 g/dl, even if there are no signs of decompensation
Hb > 6 g/dl and < 8 g/dl if there are signs of decompensation
or sickle cell disease or severe malaria or serious bacterial
infection or pre-existing heart disease
Footnotes
(a)Available in 140 mg/5 ml syrup of ferrous fumarate containing approximately 45 mg/5 ml of elemental iron and 200 mg
ferrous sulfate tablets or ferrous sulfate + folic acid tablets containing 65 mg of elemental iron. Tablets of 185 or 200 mg
ferrous fumurate or sulfate + folic acid (60 or 65 mg of elemental iron) contain 400 micrograms folic acid.
(b)Before transfusing: determine the recipient’s and potential donors’ blood groups/rhesus and carry out screening tests on
the donor’s blood for HIV-1 and 2, syphilis and, in endemic areas, malaria and Chagas disease.
1.WHO. Daily iron and folic acid supplementation in pregnant women. Geneva, 2012.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/77770/1/9789241501996_eng.pdf?ua=1This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Dehydration
Dehydration results from excessive loss of water and electrolytes from the body. If prolonged, dehydration can
compromise organ perfusion, resulting in shock.
It is principally caused by diarrhoea, vomiting and severe burns.
Children are particularly susceptible to dehydration due to frequent episodes of gastroenteritis, high surface area to
volume ratio and inability to fully communicate, or independently meet their ﬂuid needs.
 
The protocols below are focused on treatment of dehydration caused by diarrhoea and vomiting. Alternative treatment
protocols should be used for children with malnutrition (see Severe acute malnutrition, Chapter 1) or in patients with
severe burns (see Burns, Chapter 10).
Clinical features and assessment
 
Classiﬁcation of degree of dehydration (adapted from the WHO)
 
Treatment of dehydrationHistory of diarrhoea and/or vomiting and concomitant reduced urine output.
Clinical features depend on the degree of dehydration (see table below). Features such as dry mouth, absence of
tears may also be noted.
Patients with severe dehydration should be assessed for shock (tachycardia, low blood pressure and delayed
capillary reﬁll time etc.).
Electrolyte disorders may cause tachypnoea, muscle cramps or weakness, cardiac arrhythmia (irregular heart rate,
palpitation), confusion and/or seizures.
 [1] [2]
 
 Severe dehydration
At least 2 of the
following signs:Some dehydration
At least 2 
of the following signs:No dehydration
No signs of "severe"
or "some" dehydration.
Mental statusLethargic or
unconsciousRestless or irritable Normal
Radial pulse Weak or absent Palpable Easily palpable
Eyes (a)Sunken Sunken Normal
Skin pinch (b)Goes back very slowly 
(> 2 seconds)Goes back slowly
(< 2 seconds)Goes back quickly
(< 1 second)
ThirstDrinks poorly
or not able to drinkThirst, 
drinks quicklyNo thirst,
drinks normally
(a)Sunken eyes may be a normal feature in some children. Ask the mother if the child's eyes are the same as usual or if they are
more sunken than usual.
(b)Skin pinch is assessed by pinching the skin of the abdomen between the thumb and foreﬁnger without twisting. In older
people this sign is not reliable as normal aging diminishes skin elasticity.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Severe dehydration
 
WHO Treatment Plan C
 
 
 
Some dehydration
 
WHO Treatment Plan BTreat shock if present (see Shock, Chapter 1).
If able to drink, administer oral rehydration solution (ORS) PO whilst obtaining IV access.
 according to WHO Treatment Plan C, monitoring infusion rate closely:
Insert peripheral IV line using large caliber catheter (22-24G in children or 18G in adults) or intraosseous needle.
Administer Ringer lactate (RL) a
 [1] [2]
Age First, give 30 ml/kg over: (c) Then, give 70 ml/kg over:
Children < 1 year 1 hour 5 hours
Children ≥ 1 year and adults 30 minutes 2 ½ hours
(c)Repeat once if radial pulse remains weak or absent after ﬁrst bolus.
In case of suspected severe anaemia, measure haemoglobin and treat accordingly (see Anaemia, Chapter 1). b
As soon as the patient is able to drink safely (often within 2 hours), provide ORS as the patient tolerates. ORS
contains glucose and electrolytes which prevent development of complications.
Monitor ongoing losses closely. Assess clinical condition and degree of dehydration at regular intervals to ensure
continuation of appropriate treatment.
If over the course of treatment the patient:
remains or becomes lethargic: measure blood glucose level and/or treat hypoglycaemia (see Hypoglycaemia,
Chapter 1).
develops muscle cramps/weakness and abdominal distention: treat for moderate hypokalaemia with 7.5%
potassium chloride syrup (1 mmol of K/ml) PO for 2 days:
Children under 45 kg: 2 mmol/kg (2 ml/kg) daily (according to weight, the daily dose is divided into 2 or 3 doses)
Children 45 kg and over and adults: 30 mmol (30 ml) 3 times daily
This treatment should only be given as an inpatient.+
 c 
develops peri-orbital or peripheral oedema: reduce the infusion rate to a minimum, auscultate the lungs, re-
evaluate the stage of dehydration and the necessity of continuing IV rehydration. If IV rehydration is still required,
continue the infusion at a slower rate and observe the patient closely. If IV rehydration is no longer required,
change to oral treatment with ORS.
develops dyspnoea, cough and bibasal crepitations are heard on auscultation of the lungs: sit the patient up,
reduce the infusion rate to a minimum and administer one dose of furosemide IV (1 mg/kg in children; 40 mg in
adults). Monitor the patient closely over 30 minutes and assess for underlying cardiorespiratory or renal disease.
Once the patient is stabilised, reassess the degree of dehydration and the necessity of continuing IV rehydration.
If IV rehydration is still required, re-start at half the previous infusion rate and monitor closely. If IV rehydration is
no longer required, change to oral treatment with ORS.
Administer ORS according to WHO Treatment Plan B which equates to 75 ml/kg ORS given over 4 hours.
 [1] dThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 
No dehydration
Prevent dehydration:
 
WHO Treatment Plan A
 
 
Treatment of diarrhoea
In addition to the WHO treatment plan corresponding to patient's degree of dehydration:
 Age< 4
months4 to
11 months12 to
23 months2 to 4 years5 to
14 years≥ 15 years
Weight < 5 kg5 to 
7.9 kg8 to 
10.9 kg11 to 15.9
kg16 to 29.9
kg≥ 30 kg
Quantity of ORS over
4 hours200 to 400
ml400 to 
600 ml600 to 
800 ml800 to 1200
ml1200 to
2200 ml2200 to
4000 ml
Encourage additional age-appropriate ﬂuid intake, including breastfeeding in young children. Give additional ORS
after each loose stool (see below).
Monitor ongoing losses closely. Assess clinical condition and degree of dehydration at regular intervals to ensure
continuation of appropriate treatment.
Encourage age-appropriate ﬂuid intake, including breastfeeding in young children.
Administer ORS according to WHO Treatment Plan A after any loose stool.
 [1] [2]
Age Quantity of ORS
Children < 2 years 50 to 100 ml (10 to 20 teaspoons)
Children 2 to 10 years 100 to 200 ml (½ to 1 glass)
Children > 10 years and adults at least 250 ml (at least 1 glass)
Administer aetiologic treatment if required.
Administer zinc sulfate to children under 5 years (see Acute diarrhoea, Chapter 3).
Footnotes
(a)If RL not available, 0.9% sodium chloride can be used.
(b)If transfusion is required, it should be provided in parallel to IV ﬂuids, using a separate IV line. The blood volume administered
should be deducted from the total volume of Plan C.
(c)If available, take blood tests to monitor urea and electrolyte levels.
(d)For more detailed information on ORS recommendations by age and weight, refer to the guide Management of a cholera
epidemic, MSF.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
References
1.World Health Organization. The treatment of diarrhoea : a manual for physicians and other senior health workers, 4th
rev. World Health Organization. 2005. 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/43209
2.World Health Organization. Pocket book of Hospital Care for children. Guidelines for the Management of Common
Childhood Illnesses. 2013.
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/81170/9789241548373_eng.pdf?sequence=1
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Severe acute malnutrition
Last update: December 2022
 
Severe acute malnutrition (SAM) results from insufﬁcient energy (kilocalories), fat, protein and/or other nutrients
(vitamins and minerals, etc.) to cover individual needs.
 
SAM is frequently associated with medical complications due to metabolic disturbances and compromised immunity. It
is a major cause of morbidity and mortality in children globally.
 
The protocols below are focused on the diagnosis and management of SAM in children 6 to 59 months only. For
further details regarding this age group, and guidance for other age groups, refer to national recommendations and/or
specialised protocols. 
Clinical assessment
Characteristic physical signs
Diagnostic and admission criteria
Diagnostic criteria for SAM are both anthropometric and clinical:
 
Admission criteria for SAM treatment programmes vary with context. Refer to national recommendations.
Medical complications
Nutritional treatmentIn marasmus: skeletal appearance resulting from signiﬁcant loss of muscle mass and subcutaneous fat.
In kwashiorkor:
Bilateral oedema of the lower limbs sometimes extending to other parts of the body (e.g. arms and hands, face).
Discoloured, brittle hair; shiny skin which may crack, weep, and become infected.
Mid-upper arm circumference (MUAC)measures the degree of muscle wasting. MUAC < 115 mm indicates
SAM and signiﬁcant mortality risk. a 
Weight-for-height z-score (WHZ) indicates the degree of weight loss by comparing the weight of the child with the
median weight of non-malnourished children of the same height and sex. SAM is deﬁned as WHZ < –3 with
reference to the WHO Child Growth Standards. b 
The presence of bilateral pitting oedema of the lower limbs (when other causes of oedema have been ruled out)
indicates SAM, regardless of MUAC and WHZ.
Children with any of the following severe medical conditions should receive hospital-based medical management:
Pitting oedema extending from the lower limbs up to the face;
Anorexia (observed during appetite test);
Other severe complications: persistent vomiting, shock, altered mental status, seizures, severe anaemia
(clinically suspected or conﬁrmed), persistent hypoglycaemia, eye lesions due to vitamin A deﬁciency, frequent
or abundant diarrhoea, dysentery, dehydration, severe malaria, pneumonia, meningitis, sepsis, severe cutaneous
infection, fever of unknown origin, etc.
In the absence of these conditions, children should be treated as outpatients with regular follow-up.
All children with SAM should receive nutritional treatment.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Routine medical management 
The following should be provided to all inpatients and outpatients with SAM:
 
 Nutritional treatment is based on the use of specialised nutritious foods enriched with vitamins and minerals: F-75
and F-100 therapeutic milks, and ready-to-use therapeutic food (RUTF).
Nutritional treatment is organised into phases:
Phase 1 (inpatient) intends to restore metabolic functions and treat or stabilize medical complications. Children
receive F-75 therapeutic milk. This phase may last 1 to 7 days, after which children usually enter transition
phase. Children with medical complications generally begin with phase 1.
Transition phase (inpatient) intends to ensure tolerance of increased food intake and continued improvement of
clinical condition. Children receive F-100 therapeutic milk and/or RUTF. This phase usually lasts 1 to 3 days, after
which children enter phase 2.
Phase 2 (outpatient or inpatient) intends to promote rapid weight gain and catch-up growth. Children receive
RUTF. This phase usually lasts 1 to 3 days when inpatient, after which children are discharged for outpatient
care. Children without medical complications enter directly into this phase as outpatients. The outpatient
component usually lasts several weeks.
Breastfeeding should be continued in breastfed children.
Drinking water should be given in addition to meals, especially if the ambient temperature is high, or the child has a
fever or is receiving RUTF.
Antibiotic
treatmentFrom D1, unless speciﬁc signs of infection are present:
amoxicillin PO: 50 mg/kg (max. 1 g) 2 times daily for 5 to 7 days
Malaria On D1, rapid diagnostic test in endemic areas and treatment for malaria according to results or if
testing is not available (see Malaria, Chapter 6).
Intestinal
parasitesIn transition phase or upon outpatient admission, albendazole PO:
Children 12 to 23 months: 200 mg single dose
Children 24 months and over: 400 mg single dose
Vaccination
Children vaccinated between 6 and 8 months should be re-vaccinated as above (i.e. with 2
doses) once they reach 9 months of age, provided that an interval of 4 weeks from the ﬁrst dose
is respected.In transition phase or upon outpatient admission, measles vaccine for children 6 months to 5
years, unless a document shows that the child received 2 doses of vaccine administered as
follows: one dose at or after 9 months and one dose at least 4 weeks after the ﬁrst dose. 
Other vaccines included in the EPI: check vaccination status and refer the child to vaccination
services at discharge.
Tuberculosis
(TB)
 At D1 then regularly during treatment, screen for TB. For a child screening positive, perform
complete diagnostic evaluation.
For more information, refer to the guide Tuberculosis, MSF.
HIV infection
 Perform HIV counselling and testing (unless the mother explicitly declines testing).
Children under 18 months: test the mother with rapid diagnostic tests. For a mother testing
positive, request PCR test for the child.
Children 18 months and over: test the child with rapid diagnostic tests.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Management of complications
Infections
Severe anaemia
Diarrhoea and dehydration
 Respiratory, cutaneous and urinary infections are common. However, classic signs of infection, such as fever, may
be absent. [1] 
Severe infection or sepsis should be suspected in children that are lethargic or apathetic or suffering from an acute
complication such as hypothermia, hypoglycaemia, seizures, difﬁculty breathing, or shock. Immediately
administer ampicillin IV 50 mg/kg every 8 hours + gentamicin IV 7.5 mg/kg once daily. Continue this treatment
unless the source of infection is identiﬁed and different antibiotic treatment is required.
If circulatory impairment or shock, immediately administer ceftriaxone IV, one dose of 80 mg/kg, then assess the
source of infection to determine further antibiotic treatment. See also Shock, Chapter 1. Transfuse urgently as for
severe anaemia (see below) if haemoglobin (Hb)  is < 6 g/dl. 
In less severe infections, assess the source of infection (see Fever, Chapter 1) and treat accordingly.
If fever is present and causes discomfort, undress the child. If insufﬁcient, administer paracetamol PO in low dose:
10 mg/kg, up to 3 times maximum per 24 hours. Encourage oral ﬂuids (including breast milk).
If hypothermia is present, place the child skin-to-skin against the mother's body and cover with a warm blanket.
Treat for infection as above. Check blood glucose level and treat for hypoglycaemia if necessary (see
Hypoglycaemia, Chapter 1).
In children with kwashiorkor, infection of cutaneous lesions is common and may progress to soft tissue or systemic
infection. If cutaneous infection is present, stop amoxicillin and start amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO. Use
formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin: 50 mg/kg 2 times daily for 7 days.
Children with Hb < 4 or < 6 with signs of decompensation such as respiratory distress require transfusion within the
ﬁrst 24 hours (preferably with packed red blood cells, PRBC).
Transfusion volume is based on presence or absence of fever at time of ordering blood: [2] 
No fever (< 37.5 °C): 30 ml/kg of whole blood or 15 ml/kg of PRBC over 4 hours
Fever present (≥ 37.5 °C): 20 ml/kg of whole blood or 10 ml/kg of PRBC over 4 hours
Monitor closely for transfusion reactions and for signs of ﬂuid overload (see box below).
After the transfusion is completed: measure Hb at 8, 24 and 48 hours.
Diarrhoea is common. Therapeutic foods facilitate the recovery of physiological function of the gastrointestinal
tract. Amoxicillin administered as part of routine treatment reduces intestinal bacterial overgrowth. Diarrhoea
generally resolves without additional treatment. If an aetiological treatment is necessary, see Acute diarrhoea,
Chapter 3.
Zinc supplementation is not needed if children consume recommended amounts of therapeutic foods.
The diagnosis of dehydration is based on history and clinical features.
Clinical assessment is difﬁcult in children with SAM as delayed skin pinch test and sunken eyes are often present
even in the absence of dehydration.
For classiﬁcation of degree of dehydration adapted for children with SAM, see table below:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Acute diarrhoea with no dehydration (Plan A SAM)
Acute diarrhoea with some dehydration (Plan B SAM)
Acute diarrhoea with severe dehydration (Plan C SAM)Clinical features
(2 or more of the following signs)No
dehydrationSome
dehydrationSevere
dehydration
Mental status Normal Restless, irritabilityLethargic or
unconscious
ThirstNo thirst, drinks
normallyThirsty, drinks eagerlyUnable to drink or drinks
poorly
Urine output Normal ReducedAbsent for
several hours
Recent frequent watery
diarrhoea and/or vomitingYes Yes Yes
Recent obvious rapid weight
lossNo Yes Yes
Stools are neither frequent nor abundant (outpatient): oral rehydration solution (ORS) PO: 5 ml/kg after each loose
stool to prevent dehydration.
Stools are frequent and/or abundant (inpatient): ReSoMalPO or by nasogastric tube (NGT): 5 ml/kg after each
loose stool to prevent dehydration. c 
In all cases, continue feeding and breastfeeding, encourage oral ﬂuids.
Determine the target weight (weight before the onset of diarrhoea) before starting rehydration. If not feasible (e.g.
new admission), estimate target weight as current weight x 1.06.
ReSoMalPO or by NGT: 20 ml/kg/hour for 2 hours. In addition, administer 5 ml/kg of ReSoMal after each loose
stool if tolerated. c 
Assess after 2 hours (clinical evaluation and weight):
If improvement (diarrhoea and signs of dehydration regress):
Reduce ReSoMal to 10 ml/kg/hour until the signs of dehydration and/or weight loss (known or estimated)
have been corrected.
Assess every 2 hours.
Once there are no signs of dehydration and/or the target weight is reached, change to Plan A SAM to
prevent dehydration.
If no improvement after 2 to 4 hours or if oral rehydration cannot compensate for losses: change to Plan C SAM
"with circulatory impairment".
Continue feeding including breastfeeding.
Monitor for signs of ﬂuid overload (see box below). Regardless of the target weight, stop rehydration if signs
of ﬂuid overload appear.
In all patients:
Assess for circulatory impairment (see Shock, Chapter 1).
Estimate target weight as current weight x 1.1.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
During rehydration, monitor continuously for signs of ﬂuid overload. These include:
Plus any one of the following:
 
Other complications
For other complications (to be treated as inpatient), see:Measure blood glucose level and treat hypoglycaemia (Chapter 1) if necessary.
Monitor vital signs and signs of dehydration every 15 to 30 minutes.
Monitor urine output.
Monitor for signs of ﬂuid overload (see box below).
If there is no circulatory impairment:
ReSoMal PO or by NGT: 20 ml/kg over 1 hour
If the child is alert, continue feeding including breastfeeding.
Assess after 1 hour:
If improvement: change to Plan B SAM, but keep the same target weight.
If rehydration PO/NGT not tolerated (e. g. vomiting):
Stop ReSoMal. Administer glucose 5%-Ringer lactate (G5%-RL)IV infusion: 10 ml/kg/hour for 2 hours.  d 
Assess after 2 hours of IV ﬂuids:
If improvement and/or not vomiting, stop G5%-RL IV infusion and change to Plan B SAM.
If no improvement or still vomiting, continue G5%-RL IV infusion: 10 ml/kg/hour for 2 hours.
If deterioration with circulatory impairment: see below.
If there is circulatory impairment:
Stabilize (see Shock, Chapter 1).
Administer ceftriaxone IV, one dose of 80 mg/kg. Subsequent antibiotic treatment depends on assessment of
underlying cause.
Administer G5%-RL IV infusion: 10 ml/kg/hour for 2 hours. Stop ReSoMal if the child was taking it.
Assess after 1 hour of IV ﬂuids:
If improvement and no vomiting: stop IV ﬂuid and change to Plan B SAM, but keep the same target weight.
If no improvement:
Continue G5%-RL IV infusion: 10 ml/kg/hour.
Prepare for blood transfusion.
Assess after 2 hours of IV ﬂuids:
If improvement: change to Plan B SAM, but keep the same target weight.
If no improvement or deterioration:
Check Hb as baseline and administer whole blood: 10 ml/kg over at least 3 hours(max. 4 hours) using a
separate IV line. [3] 
While transfusing, continue G5%-RL IV infusion 10 ml/kg/hour for another 2 hours.
RR ≥ 10 breaths/minute compared to initial RR, or
HR ≥ 20 beats/minute compared to initial HR
New or worsening hypoxia (decrease in SpO by > 5%) 2
New onset of rales and/or ﬁne crackles in lung ﬁelds
New galloping heart rhythm
Increased liver size (must have marked liver border with pen before rehydration)
New peripheral or eyelid oedema
Hypoglycaemia, seizures, Chapter 1.
Acute pneumonia, Chapter 2.
Stomatitis, Chapter 3.
Xerophthalmia (vitamin A deﬁciency), Chapter 5.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Discharge criteria
In general:
 
Discharge criteria vary with context. Refer to national recommendations.
 
ReferencesChildren can be discharged from hospital and be treated as outpatients if the following criteria are met:
clinically well;
medical complications controlled; 
able to eat RUTF (observed during appetite test);
reduction or absence of oedema;
caregiver feels able to provide care as outpatient;
vaccinations up to date or referral to vaccination service organised.
Children can be discharged from nutritional treatment if the following criteria are met:
co-existing medical conditions stable and outpatient treatment organised if necessary (e.g. dressing changes,
follow-up for chronic diseases);
vaccinations up to date or referral to vaccination service organised;
absence of oedema and WHZ > –2 or MUAC > 125 mm for at least 2 weeks.
Footnotes
(a)MUAC is measured at the mid-point of the left upper arm. The arm should be relaxed. The measuring tape should be in
contact with the skin all around the arm, without exerting pressure.
(b)For WHZ, see WHO simpliﬁed ﬁeld tables in z-scores for girls and for boys:
https://www.who.int/tools/child-growth-standards/standards/weight-for-length-height
(c)ReSoMal is a speciﬁc oral rehydration solution for malnourished children, containing less sodium and more potassium than
standard ORS. It should be administered under medical supervision to avoid overdosing and hyponatremia.
(d)Remove 50 ml of Ringer lactate (RL) from a 500 ml RL bottle or bag, then add 50 ml of 50% glucose to the remaining 450 ml
of RL to obtain 500 ml of 5% glucose-RL solution.
1.Jones KDJ, Berkley JA. Severe acute malnutrition and infection. Paediatrics and International Child Health 2014; 34(sup1):
S1-S29.
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1179/2046904714Z.000000000218 [Accessed 24 August 2022]
2.Maitland K, Olupot-Olupot P, Kiguli S, Chagaluka G, Alaroker F, Opoka RO, Mpoya A, Engoru C, Nteziyaremye J, Mallewa M,
Kennedy N, Nakuya M, Namayanja C, Kayaga J, Uyoga S, Kyeyune Byabazaire D, M'baya B, Wabwire B, Frost G, Bates I, Evans
JA, Williams TN, Saramago Goncalves P, George EC, Gibb DM, Walker AS; TRACT Group. Transfusion Volume for Children with
Severe Anemia in Africa. N Engl J Med. 2019 Aug 1;381(5):420-431. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7610610/pdf/EMS118816.pdf [Accessed 30 September 2022]
3.Word Health Organization. Guideline: Updates on the management of severe acute malnutrition in infants and children.
Geneva: World Health Organization; 2013. 
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789241506328 [Accessed 26 August 2022]This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 2: Respiratory diseases
Acute upper airway obstruction
Rhinitis and rhinopharyngitis (common cold)
Acute sinusitis
Acute pharyngitis
Diphtheria
Other upper respiratory tract infections
Laryngotracheitis and laryngotracheobronchitis (croup)
Epiglottitis
Bacterial tracheitis
Otitis
Acute otitis externa
Acute otitis media (AOM)
Chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM)
Whooping cough (pertussis)
Bronchitis
Acute bronchitis
Chronic bronchitis
Bronchiolitis
Acute pneumonia
Pneumonia in children under 5 years of age
Pneumonia in children over 5 years and adults
Persistent pneumonia
Staphylococcal pneumonia
Asthma
Asthma attack (acute asthma)
Chronic asthma
Pulmonary tuberculosis
 
 
 This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute upper airway obstruction
Acute upper airway obstruction can be caused by foreign body aspiration, viral or bacterial infections (croup,
epiglottitis, tracheitis), anaphylaxis, burns or trauma.
Initially stable and partial obstruction may worsen and develop into a life-threatening emergency, especially in young
children.
Clinical features
Clinical signs of the severity of obstruction:
 
 
Management in all casesObstruction SignsDanger
signs
Complete Respiratory distress followed by cardiac arrest
YesImminent
completeSevere respiratory distress with cyanosis or SpO < 90% 2
Agitation or lethargy
Tachycardia, capillary reﬁll time > 3 seconds
Severe Stridor (abnormal high pitched sound on inspiration) at rest
Severe respiratory distress:
Severe intercostal and subcostal retractions
Nasal ﬂaring
Substernal retractions (inward movement of the breastbone during
inspiration)
Severe tachypnoea
Moderate Stridor with agitation
Moderate respiratory distress:
Mild intercostal and subcostal retractions
Moderate tachypnoeaNo
Mild Cough, hoarse voice, no respiratory distress
Examine children in the position in which they are the most comfortable.
Evaluate the severity of the obstruction according to the table above.
Monitor SpO, except in mild obstruction. 2
Administer oxygen continuously:
to maintain the SpO between 94 and 98% if it is ≤ 90%or if the patient has cyanosis or respiratory distress; 2  a 
if pulse oxymeter is not available: at least 5 litres/minute or to relieve the hypoxia and improve respiration.
Hospitalize (except if obstruction is mild), in intensive care if danger signs.
Monitor mental status, heart and respiratory rate, SpO and severity of obstruction. 2
Maintain adequate hydration by mouth if possible, by IV if patient unable to drink.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Management of foreign body aspiration
Acute airway obstruction (the foreign body either completely obstructs the pharynx or acts as a valve on the laryngeal
inlet), no warning signs, most frequently in a child 6 months-5 years playing with a small object or eating. Conscience is
initially maintained.
 
Perform maneuvers to relieve obstruction only if the patient cannot speak or cough or emit any sound:
Heimlich manoeuvre: stand behind the patient. Place a closed ﬁst in the pit of the stomach, above the navel and
below the ribs. Place the other hand over ﬁst and press hard into the abdomen with a quick, upward thrust. Perform
one to ﬁve abdominal thrusts in order to compress the lungs from the below and dislodge the foreign body.
Place the infant face down across the forearm (resting the forearm on the leg) and support the infant’s head with
the hand. With the heel of the other hand, perform one to ﬁve slaps on the back, between shoulder plates.
If unsuccessful, turn the infant on their back. Perform ﬁve forceful sternal compressions as in cardiopulmonary
resuscitation: use 2 or 3 ﬁngers in the center of the chest just below the nipples. Press down approximately one-
third the depth of the chest (about 3 to 4 cm).
 
Repeat until the foreign body is expelled and the patient resumes spontaneous breathing (coughing, crying, talking). If
the patient loses consciousness ventilate and perform cardiopulmonary rescucitation. Tracheostomy if unable to
ventilate.
Differential diagnosis and management of airway obstructions of
infectious origin
 
Management of other causes
 Children over 1 year and adults:
Children under 1 year:
Infections Symptoms AppearanceTiming of
symptoms
Viral croup Stridor, cough and moderate respiratory
difﬁcultyPrefers to sit Progressive
Epiglottitis Stridor, high fever and severe respiratory
distressPrefers to sit, drooling (cannot
swallow their own saliva)Rapid
Bacterial tracheitis Stridor, fever, purulent secretions and severe
respiratory distressPrefers to lie ﬂat Progressive
Retropharyngeal or
tonsillar abscessFever, sore throat and painful swallowing,
earache, trismus and hot potato voicePrefers to sit, drooling Progressive
Croup, epiglottitis, and tracheitis: see Other upper respiratory tract infections.
Abscess: refer for surgical drainage.
Anaphylactic reaction (angioedema): see Anaphylactic shock (Chapter 1)
Burns to the face or neck, smoke inhalation with airway oedema: see Burns (Chapter 10).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Footnotes
(a)If possible it is better to treat all patients with a SpO < 95% with oxygen. 2
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Rhinitis and rhinopharyngitis (common cold)
Rhinitis (inﬂammation of the nasal mucosa) and rhinopharyngitis (inﬂammation of the nasal and pharyngeal mucosa) are
generally benign, self-limited and most often of viral origin. However, they may be an early sign of another infection (e.g.
measles or inﬂuenza) or may be complicated by a bacterial infection (e.g. otitis media or sinusitis).
Clinical features
Treatment
 Nasal discharge or obstruction, which may be accompanied by sore throat, fever, cough, lacrimation, and diarrhoea
in infants. Purulent nasal discharge is not indicative of a secondary bacterial infection.
In children under 5 years, routinely check the tympanic membranes to look for an associated otitis media.
Antibiotherapy is not recommended: it does not promote recovery nor prevent complications.
Treatment is symptomatic:
Clear the nose with 0.9% sodium chloride. a 
Fever, throat soreness: paracetamol PO for 2 to 3 days (Fever, Chapter 1).
Footnotes
(a)For a child: place him on his back, head turned to the side, and instil 0.9% sodium chloride into each nostril.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute sinusitis
Acute sinusitis is an inﬂammation of one or more of the sinus cavities, caused by an infection or allergy.
Most acute sinus infections are viral and resolve spontaneously in less than 10 days. Treatment is symptomatic.
Acute bacterial sinusitis may be a primary infection, a complication of viral sinusitis or of dental origin. The principal
causative organisms are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae and Moraxella catarrhalis.
It is essential to distinguish between bacterial sinusitis and common rhinopharyngitis (see Rhinitis and rhinopharyngitis).
Antibiotic therapy is required in case of bacterial sinusitis only.
Without treatment, severe sinusitis in children may cause serious complications due to the spread of infection to the
neighbouring bony structures, orbits or the meninges.
Clinical features
Sinusitis in adults
 
Sinusitis is likely if symptoms persist for longer than 10 to 14 days or worsen after 5 to 7 days or are severe (severe
pain, high fever, deterioration of the general condition).
Sinusitis in children
Treatment
Symptomatic treatment
Antibiotherapy
 Purulent unilateral or bilateral discharge, nasal obstruction
and
Facial unilateral or bilateral pain that increases when bending over; painful pressure in maxillary area or behind the
forehead.
Fever is usually mild or absent.
Same symptoms; in addition, irritability or lethargy or cough or vomiting may be present.
In the event of severe infection: deterioration of the general condition, fever over 39 °C, periorbital or facial
oedema.
Fever and pain (Chapter 1).
Clear the nose with 0.9% sodium chloride. a 
In adults:
Antibiotherapy is indicated if the patient meets the criteria of duration or severity of symptoms. Oral amoxicillin is
the ﬁrst-line treatment.
If the diagnosis is uncertain (moderate symptoms < 10 days) and the patient can be reexamined in the next few
days, start with a symptomatic treatment, as for rhinopharyngitis or viral sinusitis.
In children:
Antibiotic therapy is indicated if the child has severe symptoms or mild symptoms associated with risk factors (e.g.
immunosuppression, sickle cell disease, asthma).
Oral amoxicillin is the ﬁrst-line treatment.
amoxicillin PO for 7 to 10 days:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Other treatments
 Children: 30 mg/kg 3 times daily (max. 3 g daily)
Adults: 1 g 3 times daily
In the event of failure to respond within 48 hours of therapy:
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO for 7 to 10 days. Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1 exclusively. The dose
is expressed in amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults:
Ratio 8:1: 2000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 1750 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times daily)
In penicillin-allergic patients:
erythromycin PO for 7 to 10 days:
Children: 30 to 50 mg/kg daily
Adults: 1 g 2 to 3 times daily b 
In infants with ethmoiditis, see Periorbital and orbital cellulitis (Chapter 5).
For sinusitis secondary to dental infection: dental extraction while under antibiotic treatment.
In the event of ophthalmologic complications (ophthalmoplegia, mydriasis, reduced visual acuity, corneal
anesthesia), refer for surgical drainage.
Footnotes
(a)For a child: place him on his back, head turned to the side, and instil 0.9% sodium chloride into each nostril.
(b)For dosage according to age or weight, see erythromycin in the guide Essential drugs, MSF.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute pharyngitis
Last updated: November 2020
 
Acute inﬂammation of the tonsils and pharynx. The majority of cases are of viral origin and do not require antibiotic
treatment. Group A streptococcus (GAS) is the main bacterial cause, and mainly affects children aged 3 to 14 years.
Acute rheumatic fever (ARF), a serious late complication of GAS pharyngitis, can be prevented with antibiotic
treatment.
One of the main objectives of assessing acute pharyngitis is to identify patients requiring antibiotic treatment.
Clinical features
 
 
Common forms:
Centor criteria
 
In patients over 14 years, the probability of GAS pharyngitis is low. Infectious mononucleosis (IM) due to the
Epstein-Barr virus should be suspected in adolescents and young adults with extreme fatigue, generalized
adenopathy and often splenomegaly.
Erythematous or exudative pharyngitis may also be associated with gonococcal or primary HIV infection. In
these cases, the diagnosis is mainly prompted by the patient's history.
 
Other forms of pharyngitis:Features common to all types of pharyngitis: throat pain, dysphagia (difﬁculty swallowing), inﬂammation of the
tonsils and pharynx, tender anterior cervical lymph nodes, with or without fever.
Speciﬁc features, depending on the cause:
Erythematous (red throat) or exudative (red throat and whitish exudate) pharyngitis: this appearance is
common to both viral and GAS pharyngitis. Centor criteria help assessment and decrease the empirical use of
antibiotics in settings where rapid testing for GAS is not available. A Centor score of less than 2 rules out GAS
infection . Nevertheless, in patients with risk factors (immunosuppression, personal or family history of ARF)
for poststreptococcal complications, or for local or general complications, do not use Centor score and
prescribe empirical antibiotic treatment. [1] [2] 
Criteria Score
Temperature > 38 °C 1
Absence of cough 1
Tender anterior cervical lymph node(s) 1
Tonsillar swelling or exudate 1
Pseudomembranous pharyngitis (red tonsils/pharynx covered with an adherent greyish white false membrane):
see Diphtheria, Chapter 2.
Vesicular pharyngitis (clusters of tiny blisters or ulcers on the tonsils): always viral (coxsackie virus or primary
herpetic infection).
Ulcero-necrotic pharyngitis: hard and painless syphilitic chancre of the tonsil; tonsillar ulcer soft on palpation in
a patient with poor oral hygiene and malodorous breath (Vincent tonsillitis).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Peritonsillar, retropharyngeal or lateral pharyngeal abscess: fever, intense pain, dysphagia, hoarse voice, trismus
(limitation of mouth opening), unilateral deviation of the uvula.
 
 
Treatment
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Spots on oral mucosa (Koplik’s spots) accompanied by conjunctivitis and skin rash (see Measles, Chapter 8).
“Strawberry” (red and bumpy) tongue accompanied by a skin rash: scarlet fever caused by GAS.
Local complications:
General complications:
Complications due to the toxin: diphtheria (see Diphtheria, Chapter 2).
Poststreptococcal complications: ARF, acute glomerulonephritis.
Signs of serious illness in children: severe dehydration, severe difﬁculty swallowing, upper airway compromise,
deterioration of general condition.
Differential diagnosis: epiglottitis (see Epiglottitis, Chapter 2).
Symptomatic treatment (fever and pain): paracetamol or ibuprofen PO (Fever, Chapter 1).
Centor score ≤ 1: viral pharyngitis, which typically resolves within a few days (or weeks, for IM): no antibiotic
treatment.
Centor score ≥ 2 or scarlet fever: antibiotic treatment for GAS infections: [3] 
If single-use injection equipment is available, benzathine benzylpenicillin is the drug of choice as streptococcus
A resistance to penicillin remains rare; it is the only antibiotic proven effective in reducing the incidence of
rheumatic fever; and the treatment is administered as a single dose.
benzathine benzylpenicillin IM
Children under 30 kg (or under 10 years): 600 000 IU single dose
Children 30 kg and over (or 10 years and over) and adults: 1.2 MIU single dose
Penicillin V is the oral reference treatment, but poor adherence is predictable due to the length of treatment.
phenoxymethylpenicillin (penicillin V) PO for 10 days
Children 1 to < 6 years: 250 mg 2 times daily
Children 6 to < 12 years: 500 mg 2 times daily
Children 12 years and over and adults: 1 g 2 times daily
Children under 1 year: 125 mg 2 times daily
Amoxicillin is an alternative and the treatment has the advantage of being relatively short. However, it can
cause adverse skin reactions in patients with undiagnosed IM and thus should be avoided when IM has not been
excluded
amoxicillin PO for 6 days
Children: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Adults: 1 g 2 times daily
Macrolides should be reserved for penicillin allergic patients as resistance to macrolides is frequent and their
efﬁcacy in the prevention of rheumatic fever has not been studied. 
azithromycin PO for 3 days
Children: 20 mg/kg once daily (max. 500 mg daily)
Adults: 500 mg once daily
Gonococcal or syphilitic pharyngitis: as for genital gonorrhoea (Chapter 9) and syphilis (Chapter 9).
Diphtherial pharyngitis: see Diphtheria (Chapter 2).
Vincent tonsillitis: metronidazole or amoxicillin.
Peritonsillar retropharyngeal or lateral pharyngeal abscess: refer for surgical drainage.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
ReferencesIf signs of serious illness or epiglottitis are present in children: hospitalise.
1.Fine AM, Nizet V, Mandl KD. Large-scale validation of the Centor and McIsaac scores to predict group A streptococcal
pharyngitis. Arch Intern Med. 2012;172(11):847-852.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC3627733/ [Accessed 20 October 2020]
2.National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Sore throat (acute): antimicrobial prescribing. 2018.
http://www.nice.org.uk/ng84 [Accessed 20 October 2020]
3.Group A Streptococcal Disease, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Atlanta (GA): CDC; 2020. 
https://www.cdc.gov/groupastrep/diseases-hcp/strep-throat.html [Accessed 20 October 2020]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Diphtheria
Last updated: October 2022
 
 
Diphtheria is a bacterial infection due to Corynebacterium diphtheriae, spread from person to person through
inhalation of infected respiratory droplets of symptomatic or asymptomatic individuals, or direct contact with
contaminated objects or diphtheria skin lesions .
After infection, C. diphtheriae has an incubation period of 1 to 5 days (max. 10 days) during which time it multiplies in
the upper respiratory tract. The bacteria secretes a toxin which causes severe local as well as systemic effects. Death
can occur from airway obstruction or as a result of systemic complications, including damage to the myocardium and
nervous system, caused by the toxin. 
Cases can remain infectious up to 8 weeks after initial infection. Antibiotic treatment can reduce infectiousness to 6
days .
Vaccination is the key to prevention and control of diphtheria. It protects individuals from severe disease (fewer and
less severe symptoms) but does not prevent the spread of C. diphtheriae. Clinical disease does not confer protective
immunity and vaccination is an integral part of case management.
Clinical features
Laboratory
Treatment [1] [2] a 
 [1] 
 [2] 
 [3] 
During clinical examination respect standard, contact, and droplet precautions (handwashing, gloves, gown, mask,
etc.). Conduct a careful examination of the throat.
Signs of respiratory diphtheria: a 
pharyngitis, rhinopharyngitis, tonsillitis or laryngitis with tough, greyish, ﬁrmly adherent pseudo-membranes of the
pharynx, nasopharynx, tonsils, or larynx;
dysphagia and cervical adenitis, at times progressing to massive swelling of the neck;
airway obstruction and possible suffocation when the infection extends to the nasal passages, larynx, trachea
and bronchi;
fever is generally low-grade. [2] 
Generalised signs due to effects of the toxin:
cardiac dysfunction (tachycardia, arrhythmias), severe myocarditis with heart failure and possibly cardiogenic
shock (see Shock, Chapter 1) 3 to 7 days or 2 to 3 weeks after onset of the disease;
neuropathies in 2 to 8 weeks after the onset of disease leading to nasal voice and difﬁculty with swallowing
(paralysis of the soft palate), vision (ocular motor paralysis), breathing (paralysis of respiratory muscles) and
ambulation (limb paralysis);
oliguria, anuria and acute renal failure.
Differential diagnoses: Epiglottitis and Acute pharyngitis, Chapter 2, Stomatitis, Chapter 3.
Diagnosis is conﬁrmed by isolation of toxigenic C. diphtheriae by culture (and antibiotic susceptibility test) of swab
specimens collected from the affected areas: throat (tonsils, pharyngeal mucosa, soft palate, exudate, ulcer, etc.),
nasopharynx.
The presence of the toxin is conﬁrmed by PCR testing (detection of diphtheria toxin gene).
Isolation of patients; standard, droplet, and contact precautions for medical staff.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
There is a risk of anaphylactic reaction, especially in patients with asthma. Close monitoring of the patient is
essential, with immediate availability of equipment for manual ventilation (Ambu bag, face mask) and
intubation, Ringer lactate and epinephrine (see Shock, Chapter 1).
Besredka method: inject 0.1 ml SC and wait 15 minutes. If there is no allergic reaction (no erythema at the injection
site or a ﬂat erythema of less than 0.5 cm in diameter), inject a further 0.25 ml SC. If there is no reaction after 15
minutes, inject the rest of the product IM or IV depending on the volume to be administered.
Doses are given as a function of the severity of illness, and the delay in treatment:
 
Never administer procaine benzylpenicillin by IV injection or infusion.
In penicillin-allergic patients, use erythromycin IV.Diphtheria antitoxin (DAT)derived from horse serum: 
Administer DAT as soon as possible after disease onset. Do not wait for bacteriological conﬁrmation; administer
DAT under close monitoring in a hospital setting, according to the Besredka method to assess possibility of allergy.
Any delay can diminish efﬁcacy. b 
 [1] 
 
 
Clinical signs Dose in units Administration route
Laryngitis or pharyngitis
or duration < 48 hours20 to 40 000
IM or IV infusion in 250 ml of 0.9% sodium
chloride in 2 to 4 hours for doses of more
than 20 000 units.Rhinopharyngitis 40 to 60 000
Severe disease (respiratory distress,
shock), cervical oedema or duration ≥ 48
hours80 to 100 000
Antibiotic treatment (as soon as possible without waiting for bacteriological conﬁrmation ) for 14 days or according
to length of treatment recommended by the national protocol:
if the patient can swallow:
azithromycin PO (ﬁrst-line)
Children: 10 to 12 mg/kg once daily (max. 500 mg daily)
Adults: 500 mg once daily
or
erythromycin PO
Children under 40 kg: 10 to 15 mg/kg (max. 500 mg) 4 times daily
Children 40 kg and over and adults: 500 mg 4 times daily
or
phenoxymethylpenicillin (penicillin V) PO
Children under 40 kg: 10 to 15 mg/kg (max. 500 mg) 4 times daily
Children 40 kg and over and adults: 500 mg 4 times daily
If the patient cannot swallow, start with one of the treatments below and change as soon as possible to oral
route with one of the oral treatments above to complete 14 days of treatment:
procaine benzylpenicillin IM
Children under 25 kg: 50 000 IU/kg (= 50 mg/kg) once daily (max. 1.2 MIU = 1.2 g daily)
Children 25 kg and over and adults: 1.2 MIU (= 1.2 g) once daily
 
 
 c 
Intubation/tracheotomy if necessary (airway obstruction, respiratory failure, etc.).
If the event of shock, see Shock, Chapter 1, for complementary treatment.
Update every patient's vaccination status before hospital discharge (or during ﬁrst visit, if receiving home-based
care). If the patient has been administered DAT and can receive adequate home-based follow up after hospital
discharge, wait 3 weeks after administration of DAT before vaccination.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Management of close contacts 
Close contacts include household members living under the same roof and people who were directly exposed (less than
one metre) to nasopharyngeal secretions of the patient on a regular basis (e.g. family or close friends, children in the
same class, medical personnel) during the 5 days or nights prior to onset of symptoms of the case .
Benzathine benzylpenicillin should never be administered by IV route.
or azithromycin PO or erythromycin PO as above for 7 days.
Outbreak surveillance measures
AND 
Prevention 
Administer 2 subsequent booster doses containing d at least 4 weeks apart.       
  [4] 
Collect nasal and pharyngeal swabs for culture before starting antibiotic prophylaxis; temperature and throat
examination daily (10 days); exclusion from school or work until 48 hours after starting antibiotic prophylaxis. If
symptoms of respiratory infection appear: treat immediately as a case of diphtheria.
Antibiotic prophylaxis:
benzathine benzylpenicillin IM
Children under 30 kg: 600 000 IU single dose
Children 30 kg and over and adults: 1.2 MIU single dose
 
 
Check vaccination status:
if less than 3 injections received: complete vaccination schedule (see Prevention below);
if 3 injections received, with the last injection over one year ago: administer a booster dose immediately;
if 3 injections received, with the last injection less than one year ago: a booster dose is not immediately
necessary.
A suspected case of diphtheria is deﬁned as a person with:
pharyngitis, rhinopharyngitis, tonsillitis and/or laryngitis
an adherent pseudo-membrane of the pharynx, nose, tonsils and/or larynx. [1] 
Isolate and treat suspect cases without delay. Collect swab samples before starting antibiotic treatment. Submit
case notiﬁcation to the public health authorities within 24 hours. [1] 
Routine vaccination (EPI), for information: 3 doses of conjugate vaccine containing the higher potency (D)
formulation of diphtheria toxoid as soon as possible as of 6 weeks of age and at 4 week intervals; D booster
between 12 and 23 months, then between 4 and 7 years; booster with a vaccine containing a reduced dose (d) of
diphtheria toxoid between 9 and 15 years. [5] 
Catch-up vaccination (individuals who have not received routine vaccination), for information:
children 1 to 6 years: 3 doses of conjugate vaccine containing the higher potency (D) formulation of diphtheria
toxoid at least 4 weeks apart;
children 7 years and over and adults (including medical staff): 3 doses of conjugate vaccine containing a reduced
dose (d) of diphtheria toxoid. Administer with a minimum interval of 4 weeks between ﬁrst and second dose and
an interval of at least 6 months between second and third dose (in the event of an outbreak this interval may be
reduced to 4 weeks to achieve protection quicker).
 [5] 
Footnotes
(a)This guide focuses on respiratory diphtheria and signs due to the toxin. It should be noted that cutaneous diphtheria is still
a signiﬁcant reservoir of C. diphtheriae. This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
References(b)DAT reduces mortality and should be given to all diphtheria patients. However, as supply is very limited, it may be necessary
to deﬁne criteria and reserve DAT for the treatment of patients who will beneﬁt the most from it. DAT can be administered
to pregnant women.
(c)erythromycin IV infusion (60 minutes)
Children: 12.5 mg/kg every 6 hours (max. 2 g daily); adults: 500 mg every 6 hours
Erythromycin powder (1 g) should be reconstituted in 20 ml of water for injection only. Then, dilute each dose of
erythromycin in 10 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of 250 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride
in children 20 kg and over and in adults. Do not dilute in glucose.
1.World Health Organization. Diphtheria. Vaccine-Preventable Diseases Surveillance Standards. 2018.
https://www.who.int/immunization/monitoring_surveillance/burden/vpd/WHO_SurveillanceVaccinePreventable_04_Diphtheria
_R2.pdf?ua=1 [Accessed 11 August 2020]
2.Tiwari TSP, Wharton M. Chapter 19: Diphtheria Toxoid. In: Plotkin SA, Orenstein WA, Ofﬁt PA, editors. Vaccines. 7th ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Elsevier; 2018. p. 261–275.
3.Truelove SA, Keegan LT, Moss WJ, Chaisson LH, Macher E, Azman AS, Lessler J. Clinical and Epidemiological Aspects of
Diphtheria: A Systematic Review and Pooled Analysis. Clin Infect Dis. 2020 Jun 24;71(1):89-97. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7312233/ [Accessed 24 November 2020]
4.Pan American Health Organization, World Health Organization. Diphtheria in the Americas - Summary of the situation 2018.
Epidemiological Update Diphtheria. 16 April 2018.
https://www.paho.org/hq/index.php?option=com_docman&view=download&category_slug=diphtheria-
%098968&alias=44497-16-april-2018-diphtheria-epidemiological-update-497&Itemid=270&lang=en [Accessed 11 August
2020]
5.World Health Organization. Diphtheria vaccine: WHO position paper - August 2017. Weekly epidemiological record 2017;
92/(31):417–436.
https://www.who.int/immunization/policy/position_papers/wer_31_diphtheria_updated_position_paper.pdf?ua=1 [Accessed
11 August 2020]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Other upper respiratory tract infections
 
 
 Laryngotracheitis and laryngotracheobronchitis (croup)
Epiglottitis
Bacterial tracheitis
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Laryngotracheitis and laryngotracheobronchitis
(croup)
Viral infection in children aged 3 months to 4 years.
Clinical features
Treatment
 
 
 
Epinephrine is intended exclusively for nebulized administration and should not be given IV or IM in croup.
 Typical barking cough, hoarse voice or cry.
Inspiratory stridor (abnormal high pitched sound on inspiration):
Croup is considered mild or moderate if the stridor only occurs with agitation;
Croup is considered severe if there is stridor at rest, especially when it is accompanied by respiratory distress.
Wheezing may also be present if the bronchi are involved.
In the absence of inspiratory stridor or retractions, treat symptomatically: ensure adequate hydration, seek medical
attention if symptoms worsen (e.g. respiratory difﬁculty, noisy breathing and inability to tolerate oral ﬂuids).
If stridor is only present with agitation (moderate croup):
Hospitalize for treatment and observation (risk of worsening).
Assure adequate hydration.
dexamethasonePO (use IV preparation ﬂavoured with sugar water, 10% or 50% glucose or juice) or IM if child
is vomiting: 0.6 mg/kg single dose (see table). a 
If danger signs are present (stridor at rest, respiratory distress), admit in intensive care:
Oxygen continuously: at least 5 litres/minute or to maintain the SpO between 94 and 98%. 2
Insert a peripheral IV line and provide IV hydration.
epinephrine (adrenaline) via nebulizer (1 mg/ml, 1 ml ampoule): 0.5 mg/kg (max. 5 mg) to be repeated every 20
minutes if danger signs persist.
Monitor heart rate during nebulization (if heart rate greater than 200, stop the nebulization).
Age 3 months 4-6 months 7-9 months 10-11 months 1-4 years
Weight 6 kg 7 kg 8 kg 9 kg 10-17 kg
Dose in mg 3 mg 3.5 mg 4 mg 4.5 mg 5 mg
Dose in ml 3 ml 3.5 ml 4 ml 4.5 ml 5 ml
NaCl 0.9% (a)1 ml 1 ml – – –
(a)Add sufﬁcient NaCl 0.9% to obtain a total volume of 4 to 4.5 ml in the nebulizing chamber.
 
 
dexamethasone(4 mg/ml, 1 ml ampoule) IM or IV: 0.6 mg/kg single dose  a This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Suspect bacterial tracheitis in a critically ill appearing childwith croup who does not improve with the above
treatment.
 
salbutamol aerosol (using a spacer): 2 to 3 puffs every 20 to 30 minutes as needed
 
 Age 3-11 months 1-2 years 3-4 years
Weight 6-9 kg 10-13 kg 14-17 kg
Dose in mg 4 mg 8 mg 10 mg
Dose in ml 1 ml 2 ml 2.5 ml
 b 
If wheezing is present:
If the patient has a complete airway obstruction, intubation if possible or emergency tracheotomy.
Footnotes
(a)Administer orally if possible in order to avoid causing agitation in the child as this may worsen symptoms. 
(b)Critically ill appearing child: weak grunting or crying, drowsiness, difﬁcult to arrouse, does not smile, unconjugate or anxious
gaze, pallor or cyanosis, general hypotonia.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Epiglottitis
Bacterial infection of the epiglottis in young children caused by Haemophilus inﬂuenzae (Hib), it is rare when Hib
vaccine coverage is high. It can be caused by other bacteria and occur in adults.
Clinical features
 
Allow the child to sit in a comfortable position or on the parent’s lap. Do not force them to lie down (may
precipitate airway obstruction). Avoid any examination that will upset the child including examination of the
mouth and throat.
Treatment
 Rapid (less than 12-24 hours) onset of high fever.
Typical “tripod or snifﬁng” position, preferring to sit, leaning forward with an open mouth, anxious appearing.
Difﬁculty swallowing, drooling, and respiratory distress.
Stridor may be present (as opposed to croup, hoarse voice and cough are usually absent).
Critically ill appearing. a 
 
 
In case of imminent airway obstruction, emergency intubation or tracheotomy is indicated. The intubation is
technically difﬁcult and should be performed under anaesthesia by a physician familiar with the procedure. Be
prepared to perform a tracheotomy if intubation is unsuccessful.
In all cases:
Insert a peripheral IV line and provide IV hydration.
Antibiotherapy:
ceftriaxone slow IV (3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes). Avoid IM route (may agitate the child and precipitate
a respiratory arrest).
Children: 50 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 1 g once daily
The IV treatment is administered for at least 5 days then, if the clinical condition has improvedand oral
treatment can be tolerated, change to:
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO to complete a total of 7 to 10 days of treatment. Use
formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1 exclusively. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 40 kg and adult:
Ratio 8:1: 3000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 3 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 2625 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 3 times daily) b 
 c 
Footnotes
(a)Critically ill appearing child: weak grunting or crying, drowsiness, difﬁcult to arrouse, does not smile, unconjugate or anxious
gaze, pallor or cyanosis, general hypotonia.
(b)For administration by IV route, ceftriaxone powder should to be reconstituted in water for injection only. For administration
by IV infusion, dilute each dose of ceftriaxone in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg
and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children over 20 kg and in adults.
(c)Improvement criteria include: fever reduction, diminished respiratory distress, improved SpO, improved appetite and/or
activity.2This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Bacterial tracheitis
Bacterial infection of the trachea in children, occurring as a complication of a previous viral infection (croup, inﬂuenza,
measles, etc.).
Clinical features
Treatment
 Fever in a critically ill appearing child. a 
Stridor, cough and respiratory distress.
Copious purulent secretions.
As opposed to epiglottitis the onset of symptoms is gradual and the child prefers to lie ﬂat.
In severe cases there is a risk of complete airway obstruction, especially in very young children.
Suction purulent secretions.
Insert a peripheral IV line and provide IV hydration.
Antibiotherapy:
ceftriaxone slow IV(3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes). Do not administer by IM route (may agitate the child and
precipitate a respiratory arrest).
Children: 50 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 1 g once daily
+
cloxacillin IV infusion (60 minutes)
Children less than 12 years: 25 to 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
Children 12 years and over and adults: 2 g every 6 hours
The IV treatment is administered for at least 5 days then, if the clinical condition has improvedand oral treatment
can be tolerated, change to :
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO to complete 7 to 10 days of treatment, as in epiglottitis. b 
 c 
If the event of complete airway obstruction, intubation if possible or emergency tracheotomy.
Footnotes
(a)Critically ill appearing child: weak grunting or crying, drowsiness, difﬁcult to arrouse, does not smile, unconjugate or anxious
gaze, pallor or cyanosis, general hypotonia.
(b)For administration by IV route, ceftriaxone powder should to be reconstituted in water for injection only. For administration
by IV infusion, dilute each dose of ceftriaxone in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg
and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children over 20 kg and in adults.
(c)Improvement criteria include: fever reduction, diminished respiratory distress, improved SpO, improved appetite and/or
activity.2This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Otitis
 
 
 Acute otitis externa
Acute otitis media (AOM)
Chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM)
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute otitis externa
Diffuse inﬂammation of the external ear canal, due to bacterial or fungal infection. Common precipitants of otitis
externa are maceration, trauma of the ear canal or presence of a foreign body or dermatologic diseases (such as
eczema, psoriasis).
 
Clinical features
TreatmentEar canal pruritus or ear pain, often severe and exacerbated by motion of the pinna; feeling of fullness in the ear;
clear or purulent ear discharge or no discharge
Otoscopy (remove skin debris and secretions from the auditory canal by gentle dry mopping (use a dry cotton bud
or a small piece of dry cotton wool):
diffuse erythema and edema, or infected eczema, of the ear canal
look for a foreign body
if visible, the tympanic membrane is normal (swelling and pain very often prevent adequate visualization of the
tympanic membrane)
Remove a foreign body, if present.
Treatment of pain: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1, Pain).
Local treatment:
Remove secretions from the auditory canal by gentle dry mopping (use a dry cotton bud or a small piece of dry
cotton wool). Consider ear irrigation (0.9% sodium chloride, using a syringe) only if the tympanic membrane can
be fully visualised and is intact (no perforation). Otherwise, ear irrigation is contra-indicated.
Apply ciproﬂoxacin ear drops in the affected ear(s) for 7 days:
Children ≥ 1 year: 3 drops 2 times daily
Adults: 4 drops 2 times daily
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute otitis media (AOM)
Acute inﬂammation of the middle ear, due to viral or bacterial infection, very common in children under 3 years, but
uncommon in adults.
The principal causative organisms of bacterial otitis media are Streptococcus pneumoniae, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae,
Moraxella catarrhalis and in older children, Streptococcus pyogenes.
Clinical features
Treatment
 
 
amoxicillin PO for 5 days
Children: 30 mg/kg 3 times daily (max. 3 g daily)
Adults: 1 g 3 times dailyRapid onset of ear pain (in infants: crying, irritability, sleeplessness, reluctance to nurse) and ear discharge
(otorrhoea) or fever.
Other signs such as rhinorrhoea, cough, diarrhoea or vomiting are frequently associated, and may confuse the
diagnosis, hence the necessity of examining the tympanic membranes.
Otoscopy: bright red tympanic membrane (or yellowish if rupture is imminent) and presence of pus, either
externalised (drainage in ear canal if the tympanic membrane is ruptured) or internalised (opaque or bulging tympanic
membrane). The combination of these signs with ear pain or fever conﬁrms the diagnosis of AOM.
Note:
The following otoscopic ﬁndings are not sufﬁcient to make the diagnosis of AOM:
A red tympanic membrane alone, with no evidence of bulging or perforation, is suggestive of viral otitis in a
context of upper respiratory tract infection, or may be due to prolonged crying in children or high fever.
The presence of air bubbles or ﬂuid behind an intact tympanic membrane, in the absence of signs and symptoms
of acute infection, is suggestive of otitis media with effusion (OME).
Complications, particularly in high-risk children (malnutrition, immunodeﬁciency, ear malformation) include chronic
suppurative otitis media, and rarely, mastoiditis, brain abscess or meningitis.
In all cases:
Treatment of fever and pain: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1).
Ear irrigation is contra-indicated if the tympanic membrane is ruptured, or when the tympanic membrane cannot
be fully visualised. Ear drops are not indicated.
Indications for antibiotic therapy:
Antibiotics are prescribed in children less than 2 years, children whose assessment suggests severe infection
(vomiting, fever > 39 °C, severe pain) and children at risk of unfavourable outcome (malnutrition,
immunodeﬁciency, ear malformation).
For other children:
If the child can be re-examined within 48 to 72 hours: it is preferable to delay antibiotic prescription.
Spontaneous resolution is probable and a short symptomatic treatment of fever and pain may be sufﬁcient.
Antibiotics are prescribed if there is no improvement or worsening of symptoms after 48 to 72 hours.
If the child cannot be re-examined: antibiotics are prescribed.
For children treated with antibiotics: advise the mother to bring the child back if fever and pain persist after 48
hours.
Choice of antibiotherapy:
Amoxicillin is the ﬁrst-line treatment:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO for 5 days
Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 40 kg and adult:
Ratio 8:1: 2000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 1750 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times daily)
Persistence of a ear drainage alone, without fever and pain, in a child who has otherwise improved (reduction in
systemic symptoms and local inﬂammation) does not warrant a change in antibiotic therapy. Clean ear canal by
gentle dry mopping until no more drainage is obtained.
azithromycin PO
Children over 6 months: 10 mg/kg once daily for 3 daysAmoxicillin/clavulanic acid is used as second-line treatment, in the case of treatment failure. Treatment failure is
deﬁned as persistence of fever and/or ear pain after 48 hours of antibiotic treatment.
Macrolides should be reserved for very rare penicillin-allergic patients, as treatment failure (resistance to
macrolides) is frequent.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chronic suppurative otitis media (CSOM)
Chronic bacterial infection of the middle ear with persistent purulent discharge through a perforated tympanic
membrane.
The principal causative organisms are Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Proteus sp, staphylococcus, other Gram negative
and anaerobic bacteria.
Clinical features
Treatment
Children 1 year and over: 3 drops 2 times daily
Adults: 4 drops 2 times dailyPurulent discharge for more than 2 weeks, often associated with hearing loss or even deafness; absence of pain
and fever
Otoscopy: perforation of the tympanic membrane and purulent exudate
Complications:
Consider a superinfection (AOM) in the case of new onset of fever with ear pain, and treat accordingly.
Consider mastoiditis in the case of new onset of high fever, severe ear pain and/or tender swelling behind the
ear, in a patient who appears signiﬁcantly unwell.
Consider brain abscess or meningitis in the case of impaired consciousness, neck stiffness and focal
neurological signs (e.g. facial nerve paralysis).
Remove secretions from the auditory canal by gentle dry mopping (use a dry cotton bud or a small piece of dry
cotton wool).
Apply ciproﬂoxacin ear drops until no more drainage is obtained (approximately 2 weeks, max. 4 weeks):
Complications:
Chronic mastoiditis is a medical emergency that requires prompt hospitalisation, prolonged antibiotherapy that
covers the causative organisms of CSOM (ceftriaxone IM for 10 days + ciproﬂoxacin PO for 14 days),
atraumatic cleaning of the ear canal; surgical treatment may be required. Before transfer to hospital, if the
patient needs to be transferred, administer the ﬁrst dose of antibiotics.
Meningitis (Chapter 7).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Whooping cough (pertussis)
Whooping cough is a highly contagious bacterial infection of the lower respiratory tract, of prolonged duration, due
to Bordetella pertussis.
B. pertussis is transmitted through inhalation of droplets spread by infected individuals (coughing, sneezing).
The majority of cases arise in non-vaccinated or incompletely vaccinated individuals. Whooping cough affects all age
groups. Signs and symptoms are usually minor in adolescents and adults. As a result the infection may be ignored, thus
contributing to the spread of B. pertussis and infection in infants and young children, in whom the illness is severe.
Clinical features
After an incubation period of 7 to 10 days, the illness evolves in 3 phases:
 
 
 
Management and treatment
Suspect cases
 
 
 
 Catarrhal phase (1 to 2 weeks): coryza and cough. At this stage, the illness is indistinguishable from a minor upper
respiratory infection.
Paroxysmal phase (1 to 6 weeks):
Typical presentation: cough of at least 2 weeks duration, occurring in characteristic bouts (paroxysms), followed
by a laboured inspiration causing a distinctive sound (whoop), or vomiting. Fever is absent or moderate, and the
clinical exam is normal between coughing bouts; however, the patient becomes more and more fatigued.
Atypical presentations:
Infants under 6 months: paroxysms are poorly tolerated, with apnoea, cyanosis; coughing bouts and whoop
may be absent.
Adults: prolonged cough, often without other symptoms.
Complications:
Major: in infants, secondary bacterial pneumonia (new-onset fever is an indicator); malnutrition and
dehydration triggered by poor feeding due to cough and vomiting; rarely, seizures, encephalopathy; sudden
death.
Minor: subconjunctival haemorrhage, petechiae, hernias, rectal prolapse.
Convalescent phase: symptoms gradually resolve over weeks or months.
Routinely hospitalise infants less than 3 months, as well as children with severe cases. Infants under 3 months must
be monitored 24 hours per day due to the risk of apnoea.
When children are treated as outpatients, educate the parents about signs that should lead to re-consultation
(fever, deterioration in general condition, dehydration, malutrition, apnoea, cyanosis).
Respiratory isolation (until the patient has received 5 days of antibiotic treatment):
at home: avoid contact with non-vaccinated or incompletely vaccinated infants;
in congregate settings: exclusion of suspect cases;
in hospital: single room or grouping together of cases away from other patients (cohorting).
Hydration and nutrition: ensure children < 5 years are well hydrated; breastfeeding should continue. Advise mothers
to feed the child frequently in small quantities after coughing bouts and the vomiting which follows. Monitor the
weight of the child during the course of the illness, and consider food supplements for several weeks after recovery.
Antibiotherapy:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Antibiotic treatment is indicated in the ﬁrst 3 weeks after onset of cough. Infectivity is virtually nil after 5 days of
antibiotherapy.
 
Post-exposure prophylaxis
 
Note: pertussis vaccination should be updated in all cases (suspects and contacts). If the primary series has been
interrupted, it should be completed, rather than restarted from the beginning.
Prevention
Routine vaccination with polyvalent vaccines containing pertussis antigens (e.g. DTP, or DTP + Hep B, or DTP + Hib +
Hep B) from the age of 6 weeks or according to national protocol.
Neither vaccination nor natural disease confers lasting immunity. Booster doses are necessary to reinforce immunity
and reduce the risk of developing disease and transmitting it to young children.  Antibiotic Children Adults
First line azithromycin PO
for 5 days10 mg/kg once daily
(max. 500 mg daily)D1 500 mg
D2 to D5 250 mg once daily
Alternative (a)co-trimoxazole PO
for 14 days
(if macrolides contra-
indicated or not tolerated)20 mg/kg SMX + 4 mg/kg TMP
2 times daily
(avoid in infant < 1 month, and
in the last month of pregnancy)800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP 2
times daily
(a)Erythromycin (7 days) is a possible alternative but azithromycin is better tolerated and simpler to administrate (shorter
treatment duration, fewer daily doses). For dosage according to age or weight, see erythromycin in the guide Essential
drugs, MSF.
For hospitalised children:
Place the child in a semi-reclining position (± 30°).
Oro-pharyngeal suction if needed.
Antibiotic prophylaxis (same treatment as for suspect cases) is recommended for unvaccinated or incompletely
vaccinated infants of less than 6 months, who have had contact with a suspect case.
Isolation of contacts is not necessary.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Bronchitis
 
 
 Acute bronchitis
Chronic bronchitis
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute bronchitis
An acute inﬂammation of the bronchial mucosa, most commonly of viral origin. In older children it can be caused
by Mycoplasma pneumoniae. In children over 2 years of age with repetitive acute bronchitis or ‘wheezing’ bronchitis,
consider asthma (see Asthma). In children under 2 years of age, consider bronchiolitis (see Bronchiolitis).
Clinical features
Often begins with a rhinopharyngitis that descends progressively: pharyngitis, laryngitis, tracheitis.
Treatment
amoxicillin PO
Children: 30 mg/kg 3 times daily (max. 3 g daily) for 5 days
Adults: 1 g 3 times daily for 5 daysHeavy cough, dry at the beginning then becoming productive
Low-grade fever
No tachypnoea, no dyspnoea
On pulmonary auscultation: bronchial wheezing
Fever: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1).
Keep the patient hydrated, humidify air (with a bowl of water or a wet towel).
Children: nasal irrigation with 0.9% sodium chloride or Ringer lactate, 4 to 6 times daily to clear the airway.
Antibiotherapy is not useful for patients in good overall condition with rhinopharyngitis or inﬂuenza.
Antibiotherapy is indicated only if:
the patient is in poor general condition: malnutrition, measles, rickets, severe anaemia, cardiac disease, elderly
patient etc.
if the patient has dyspnoea, fever greater than 38.5 °C and purulent expectorations: a secondary infection
with Haemophilus inﬂuenzae or with pneumococcus is probable.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chronic bronchitis
A chronic inﬂammation of the bronchial mucosa due to irritation (tobacco, pollution), allergy (asthma) or infection
(repetitive acute bronchitis). It may develop into chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.
Clinical features
 
A patient with an acute exacerbation of chronic bronchitis presents with:
TreatmentProductive cough for 3 consecutive months per year for 2 successive years.
No dyspnoea at onset. Dyspnoea develops after several years, ﬁrst on exertion, then becoming persistent.
On pulmonary auscultation: bronchial wheeze (always exclude tuberculosis).
Onset or increase of dyspnoea.
Increased volume of sputum.
Purulent sputum.
Antibiotic treatment is not useful in treating simple chronic bronchitis.
Antibiotic treatment may be useful, for patients in a poor general condition only, for acute exacerbations of chronic
bronchitis (see Acute bronchitis).
Discourage smoking and other irritating factors.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Bronchiolitis
Bronchiolitis is an epidemic and seasonal viral infection of the lower respiratory tract in children less than 2 years of
age, characterised by bronchiolar obstruction.
Respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is responsible for 70% of cases of bronchiolitis. Transmission of RSV is direct,
through inhalation of droplets (coughing, sneezing), and indirect, through contact with hands or materials contaminated
by infected secretions.
In the majority of cases, bronchiolitis is benign, resolves spontaneously (relapses are possible), and can be treated on
an outpatient basis.
Severe cases may occur, which put the child at risk due to exhaustion or secondary bacterial infection. Hospitalisation
is necessary when signs/criteria of severity are present (10 to 20% of cases).
Clinical features
Rhinopharyngitis, with dry cough, precedes these features by 24 to 72 hours; fever is absent or moderate.
 
Treatment
Treatment is symptomatic. Obstructive signs and symptoms last for about 10 days; cough may persist for 2 weeks
longer.
 
Hospitalise children with one of the following criteria:
 
Consider hospitalisation on a case-by-case basis in the following situations:
 
In all other cases, the child may be treated at home, provided the parents are taught how to carry out treatment, and
what signs of severity should lead to re-consultation.
Outpatient treatmentTachypnoea, dyspnoea, wheezing, cough; profuse, frothy, obstructive secretions.
On auscultation: prolonged expiration with diffuse, bilateral wheezes; sometimes diffuse ﬁne, end-inspiratory
crackles.
Signs of severity:
Signiﬁcant deterioration in general condition, toxic appearance (pallor, greyish colouration)
Apnoea, cyanosis (check lips, buccal mucosa, ﬁngernails)
Respiratory distress (nasal ﬂaring, sternal and chest wall indrawing)
Anxiety and agitation (hypoxia), altered level of consciousness
Respiratory rate > 60/minute
Decreased respiratory distress and slow respirations (< 30/minute below the age of 1 year and < 20/minute
below the age of 3 years, exhaustion). Exercise caution in interpreting these signs as indicators of clinical
improvement.
Sweats, tachycardia at rest and in the absence of fever
Silence on auscultation (severe bronchospasm)
Difﬁculty drinking or sucking (reduced tolerance for exertion)
Presence of any sign of severity
Pre-existing pathology (cardiac or pulmonary disease, malnutrition, HIV, etc.)
Associated acute pathology (viral gastro-enteritis, bacterial infection, etc.)
Age less than 3 months
Nasal irrigation with 0.9% NaCl before each feeding (demonstrate the technique to the mother). a This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Hospitalisation
 
Prevention and control
The risk of transmission of the virus is increased in hospital settings:
 Small, frequent feedings to reduce vomiting triggered by bouts of coughing.
Increased ﬂuids if fever and/or signiﬁcant secretions are present.
Treat fever (Chapter 1).
Handle the patient the patient as little as possible and avoid unnecessary procedures.
In all cases:
Place the infant in a semi-reclining position (± 30°).
Nasal irrigation, small, frequent feeds, treatment of fever: as for outpatient treatment.
Gentle oro-pharyngeal suction if needed.
Monitor ﬂuid intake: normal requirements are 80 to 100 ml/kg/day + 20 to 25 ml/kg/day with high fever or very
profuse secretions.
According to symptoms:
Humidiﬁed nasal oxygen (1 to 2 litres/minute).
When there is vomiting or signiﬁcant fatigue when sucking, ﬂuid requirements may be administered by
nasogastric tube (small volumes on a frequent basis) or the IV route, for the shortest possible time. Avoid
breastfeeding or oral feeds in children with severe tachypnoea, but do not prolong NG feeds (respiratory
compromise) or IV infusions any longer than necessary.
Bronchodilator therapy: this therapy may be considered after a trial treatment has been given
(salbutamol inhaler, 100 micrograms/puff: 2 to 3 puffs with spacer, repeated twice at an interval of 30 minutes).
If inhaled salbutamol appears effective in relieving symptoms, the treatment is continued (2 to 3 puffs every 6
hours in the acute phase, then gradual reduction as recovery takes place). If the trial is ineffective, the treatment
is discontinued.
Antibiotics are not indicated unless there is concern about complications such as secondary bacterial
pneumonia.
Children with bronchiolitis should be grouped together, away from other children (cohorting).
As infection is most commonly transmitted by the hands, the most important prevention measure is hand-washing
after any contact with patients, and objects or surfaces in contact with patients on which the virus may survive for
several hours.
In addition, staff should wear gowns, gloves and surgical masks when in contact with patients.
Footnotes
(a)Lie the child on his back, head turned to the side and instil 0.9% NaCl into the nose, one nostril at a time.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute pneumonia
 
 
 
 
Acute pneumonia is a viral, bacterial (pneumococcus, Haemophilus inﬂuenzae, staphylococcus, atypical bacteria) or
parasitic (pneumocystosis) infection of the pulmonary alveoli.Pneumonia in children under 5 years of age
Pneumonia in children over 5 years and adults
Persistent pneumonia
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Pneumonia in children under 5 years of age
The most common causes are viruses, pneumococcus and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae.
Clinical features
 
Clinical examination must be done on a calm child in order to correctly count the respiratory rate and look for signs of
serious illness.
 
RR ≥ 60 breaths/minute in children under 1 months
RR ≥ 50 breaths/minute in children from 1 to 11 months
RR ≥ 40 breaths/minute in children from 12 months to 5 years
 
Notes:
 
Consider also:
Treatment
Severe pneumonia (inpatient treatment)Cough or difﬁculty breathing
Fever often high (> 39 °C), but the child may present with low-grade fever or may have no fever (often a sign of
serious illness)
A child has tachypnoea (increased respiratory rate) if:
On pulmonary auscultation: dullness with diminished vesicular breath sounds, crepitations and sometimes bronchial
breathing or normal pulmonary auscultation.
Signs of serious illness (severe pneumonia):
Chest indrawing: the inferior thoracic wall depresses on inspiration as the superior abdomen expands
Cyanosis (lips, oral mucosa, ﬁngernails) or SpO < 90% 2
Nasal ﬂaring
Altered consciousness (child is abnormally sleepy or difﬁcult to wake)
Stridor (hoarse noise on inspiration)
Grunting (a short repetitive noise produced by a partial closure of the vocal cords) on expiration
Refusal to drink or feed
Children under 2 months
Severe malnutrition
In malnourished children, the RR thresholds should be decreased by 5 breaths/minute from those listed above.
Chest indrawing is signiﬁcant if it is clearly visible and present at all times. If it is observed when a child is upset or
feeding and is not visible when the child is resting, there is no chest indrawing.
In children under 2 months of age, moderate chest indrawing is normal as the thoracic wall is ﬂexible.
If only the soft tissues between the ribs or above the clavicles depress, there is no chest indrawing.
Malaria in endemic areas, as it may also cause cough and tachypnoea.
Staphylococcal pneumonia in patients with empyema or painful abdominal swelling and diarrhoea.
Pneumocystosis in children with conﬁrmed or suspected HIV infection (see HIV infection and AIDS, Chapter 8).
Tuberculosis:
in a child with cough, fever and poor weight gain and a history of close contact with a tuberculous patient. For
the diagnosis, refer to the MSF handbook, Tuberculosis. a  
in the event of pneumonia complicated with empyema (pus in the pleural space).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Children under 2 months 
The ﬁrst line treatment is the combination ampicillin slow IV (3 minutes) for 10 days + gentamicin slow IV (3 minutes)
or IM for 5 days:
 
 
For ampicillin, IV route is preferred but IM route may be an alternative.
 
If ampicillin is not available, alternatives may be cefotaxime slow IV (3 minutes) or infusion (20 minutes) or IM for 10
days (for doses, see Meningitis, Chapter 7), or, as a last resort: ceftriaxone slow IV(3 minutes) or infusion (30 minutes;
60 minutes in neonates) or IM: 50 mg/kg once daily for 10 days.
 
If the child's condition does not improveafter 48 hours of well administered treatment, add cloxacillin IV for 10 to 14
days:
 
 
Children from 2 months to 5 years
The ﬁrst line treatment is:
ceftriaxone IM or slow IV(3 minutes): 50 mg/kg once daily
or
ampicillin slow IV (3 minutes) or IM: 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
+ gentamicin slow IV (3 minutes) or IM: 6 mg/kg once daily
Ampicillin is preferably administered in 4 divided doses. If the context does not permit it, the daily dose must be divided
in at least 3 doses.
 
The treatment is administered by parenteral route for at least 3 days then, if the clinical condition has improvedand
oral treatment can be tolerated, switch to amoxicillin PO: 30 mg/kg 3 times daily to complete 10 days of treatment.
 
If the child's condition deteriorates or does not improve after 48 hours of correct administration, add cloxacillin IV: 25
to 50 mg/kg every 6 hours. After clinical improvement and 3 days with no fever, switch to amoxicillin/clavulanic
acid (co-amoxiclav) PO to complete 10 to 14 days of treatment. Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1
exclusively. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin: 50 mg/kg 2 times daily. 
Children
0 - 7 days
 < 2 kgampicillin 50 mg/kg every 12 hours
+ gentamicin 3 mg/kg once daily
≥ 2 kgampicillin 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
+ gentamicin 5 mg/kg once daily
Children
8 days - < 1 monthampicillin 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
+ gentamicin 5 mg/kg once daily
Children
1 month - < 2 monthsampicillin 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
+ gentamicin 6 mg/kg once daily
 b 
 c 
Children 0 - 7 days< 2 kg cloxacillin 50 mg/kg every 12 hours
≥ 2 kg cloxacillin 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
Children > 7 days< 2 kg cloxacillin 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
≥ 2 kg cloxacillin 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
 b 
 c This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
If the child's condition does not improve after 48 hours with ceftriaxone + cloxacillin, consider tuberculosis. For the
diagnosis, refer to the guide Tuberculosis, MSF.
If tuberculosis is unlikely, continue with ceftriaxone + cloxacillin and add azithromycin (see Atypical pneumonia).
Notes:
Adjuvant therapy
Use a nasogastric tube only if an IV line cannot be established: children under 12 months: 5 ml/kg/hour; children
over 12 months: 3 to 4 ml/kg/hour; alternate milk and water. Resume normal oral feeding as soon as possible.
Pneumonia with no signs of serious illness
Children under 2 months
Admit the child for inpatient care and treat for severe pneumonia.
Children from 2 months to 5 years
Treat as outpatient, except infants.
amoxicillin PO: 30 mg/kg 3 times daily for 5 days
 
Follow-up in 48 to 72 hours or sooner if the child’s condition deteriorates:
 For malnourished children, refer to speciﬁc protocol.
In the event of moderate-large empyema, assess if drainage is required. Administer antibiotics active against
pneumococci and staphylococci (see Staphylococcal pneumonia).
Fever: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1).
Infants: keep warm.
Install on an incline (head elevated) or in semi-sitting position.
Clear the airway (nasal irrigation with 0.9% sodium chloride if needed).
Oxygen at the ﬂow rate required to maintain SpO ≥ 90% or, if pulse oxymeter is not available, minimum 1
litre/minute.2
Maintain adequate hydration and nutrition:
In children with severe respiratory difﬁculty: place an IV line and give 70% of normal maintenance ﬂuids. Resume
oral feeding as soon as possible (no severe respiratory difﬁculty, ability to eat normally).
In the absence of severe respiratory difﬁculty: breastfeed on demand; milk/food and water by spoon on
demand.
ORS when required (Dehydration, Chapter 1).
If the condition is improving: continue with the same antibiotic to complete treatment.  c 
If there is no improvement after 3 days of correct administration: add azithromycin (see Atypical pneumonia).
If the condition is deteriorating: hospitalise and treat as severe pneumonia.
Footnotes
(a)Contact is deﬁned as living in the same household, or in close and regular contact with any known or suspected tuberculous
case within the last 12 months.
(b)The solvent of ceftriaxone for IM injection contains lidocaine. Ceftriaxone reconstituted using this solvent must never be
administered by IV route. For IV administration, water for injection must always be used. 
(c)Improvement criteria include: fever reduction, diminished respiratory distress, improved SpO, improved appetite and/or
activity. 2This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Pneumonia in children over 5 years and adults
The most common causes are viruses, pneumococcus, and Mycoplasma pneumoniae.
Clinical features
 
Sudden onset with high fever (higher than 39 °C), thoracic pain and oral herpes are suggestive of pneumococcal
infection. Symptoms may be confusing, particularly in children with abdominal pain, meningeal syndrome, etc.
 
Signs of serious illness (severe pneumonia) include:
 
Patients at risk include the elderly, patients suffering from heart failure, sickle cell disease or severe chronic bronchitis;
immunocompromised patients (severe malnutrition, HIV infection with CD4 < 200).
Treatment
Severe pneumonia (inpatient treatment)
ceftriaxone IM or slow IV(3 minutes)
Children: 50 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 1 g once daily
The treatment is given by parenteral route for at least 3 days then, if the clinical condition has improvedand oral
treatment can be tolerated, switch to amoxicillin PO to complete 7 to 10 days of treatment:
Children: 30 mg/kg 3 times daily (max. 3 g daily)
Adults: 1 g 3 times daily
or
ampicillin slow IV (3 minutes) or IM
Children: 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
Adults: 1 g every 6 to 8 hours
Ampicillin is preferably administered in 4 divided doses. If the context does not permit it, the daily dose must be divided
in at least 3 doses.
The treatment is given by parenteral route for at least 3 days then, if the clinical condition has improvedand oral
treatment can be tolerated, switch to the oral route with amoxicillin PO as above, to complete 7 to 10 days of
treatment.
 Cough, with or without purulent sputum, fever, thoracic pain, tachypnoea
On pulmonary auscultation: decreased vesicular breath sounds, dullness, localised foci of crepitations, sometimes
bronchial wheeze.
Cyanosis (lips, oral mucosa, ﬁngernails)
Nasal ﬂaring
Intercostal or subclavial indrawing
RR > 30 breaths/minute
Heart rate > 125 beats/minute
Altered level of consciousness (drowsiness, confusion)
 a 
 b 
 b This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
If the clinical condition deteriorates or does not improve after 48 hours of correct administration, administer
ceftriaxone as above + cloxacillin IV infusion:
Children: 25 to 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
Adults: 2 g every 6 hours
After clinical improvement and 3 days with no fever, switch to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO to
complete 10 to 14 days of treatment. Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1 exclusively. The dose is expressed in
amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults:
Ratio 8:1: 3000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 3 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 2625 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 3 times daily)
 
If the clinical condition does not improve after 48 hours with ceftriaxone + cloxacillin, consider tuberculosis. For the
diagnosis, refer to the guide Tuberculosis, MSF.
 
If tuberculosis is unlikely, continue with ceftriaxone + cloxacillin and add azithromycin (see Atypical pneumonia).
Adjuvant therapy
Pneumonia without signs of serious illness (outpatient treatment)
amoxicillin PO
Children: 30 mg/kg 3 times daily (max. 3 g daily) for 5 days
Adults: 1 g 3 times daily for 5 days
 
Follow-up in 48 to 72 hours or sooner if the child’s condition deteriorates:
 Fever: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1).
Clear the airway (nasal irrigation with 0.9% sodium chloride if needed).
Oxygen at the ﬂow rate required to maintain SpO ≥ 90% or, if pulse oxymeter is not available, minimum 1
litre/minute.2
Maintain adequate hydration and nutrition.
If the condition is improving: continue with the same antibiotic to complete treatment.  b 
If there is no improvement after 3 days of correct administration: add azithromycin (see Atypical pneumonia).
If the condition is deteriorating: hospitalise and treat as severe pneumonia.
Footnotes
(a)The solvent of ceftriaxone for IM injection contains lidocaine. Ceftriaxone reconstituted using this solvent must never be
administered by IV route. For IV administration, water for injection must always be used.
(b)Improvement criteria include: fever reduction, diminished respiratory distress, improved SpO, improved appetite and/or
activity. 2
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Persistent pneumonia
 
 
Last update: November 2022
 
In patients not responding to therapy, consider atypical pneumonia, tuberculosis, pneumocystosis (HIV infection and
AIDS, Chapter 8).
 
Bacteria responsible for atypical pneumonia are mainly Mycoplasma pneumoniae and Chlamydophila pneumoniae. If
suspected, one of the following antibiotics may be used:
 
First choice, azithromycin PO
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 500 mg) once daily for 5 days
Adults: 500 mg on D1 then, 250 mg once daily from D2 to D5
 
If not available,
erythromycin PO
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 500 mg) 4 times daily for 10 to 14 days
Adults: 500 mg 4 times daily for 10 to 14 days
or
doxycycline PO (except in pregnant or breastfeeding women)
Children under 45 kg: 2 to 2.2 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily for 10 to 14 days
Children 45 kg and over and adults: 100 mg 2 times daily for 10 to 14 days
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Staphylococcal pneumonia
Pneumonia due to Staphylococcus aureus affecting young children, often those in a poor general condition
(malnutrition, skin lesions, etc.). Staphylococcal pneumonia is a classic complication of measles.
Clinical features
Paraclinical investigations
Treatment
Treatment is urgent as patients deteriorate quickly: hospitalise.
 
ceftriaxone IM or slow IV(at least 3 minutes): 50 mg/kg once daily
+ cloxacillin IV infusion (60 minutes)
Neonates 0 to 7 days (< 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 12 hours
Neonates 0 to 7 days (≥ 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
Neonates 8 days to < 1 month (< 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
Neonates 8 days to < 1 month (≥ 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
Children 1 month and over: 25 to 50 mg/kg every 6 hours (max. 8 g daily)
 
After clinical improvement, 3 days with no fever, and drain removal if any, switch to amoxicillin/clavulanic
acid PO to complete 10 to 14 days. Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1 exclusively. The dose is expressed in
amoxicillin: 50 mg/kg 2 times daily
 
In the event of large empyema: same treatment but switch to the oral route after 7 days with no fever and treat for
3 weeks.
 
Clindamycin IV may be an alternative to cloxacillin: 10 mg/kg every 8 hours then switch to clindamycin PO at the
same dose, according to the criteria above.
 
 
 
 
 General signs: change in overall condition, pallor, high fever or hypothermia, frequently signs of shock; presence of
skin lesions (point of bacterial entry), however, skin lesions may be absent.
Gastrointestinal signs: nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, painful abdominal distention.
Respiratory signs: dry cough, tachypnoea, signs of distress (nasal ﬂaring, chest indrawing). Pulmonary auscultation is
often normal; sometimes dullness indicating pleural effusion.
Chest x-ray (if available): may show multilobar consolidation, cavitation, pneumatoceles, spontaneous
pneumothorax.
Antibiotic treatment: if staphylococcal aetiology cannot be conﬁrmed or while waiting for conﬁrmation, a broad
spectrum antibiotic therapy is recommended:
 a 
 b 
 c 
Fever: paracetamol (Chapter 1).
Hydration by oral route or infusion or nasogastric tube depending on clinical condition.
Oxygen at the ﬂow rate required to maintain SpO ≥ 90% or, if pulse oxymeter is not available, minimum 1
litre/minute.2
Local disinfection of skin lesions.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Clinical evolution
 If there is signiﬁcant pleural effusion: pleural tap with drainage (for pyopneumothorax; insert 2 drains, one anterior
and one posterior) or without drainage (for suppurative pleurisy, make repetitive taps with an IV catheter).
There is a serious risk of decompensation from pneumothorax or suppurative pleurisy or pyopneumothorax.
On a paediatric ward, adequate equipment for urgent pleural drainage should always be available.
Footnotes
(a)The solvent of ceftriaxone for IM injection contains lidocaine. Ceftriaxone reconstituted using this solvent must never be
administered by IV route. For IV administration, water for injection must always be used.
(b)Cloxacillin powder for injection should be reconstituted in 4 ml of water for injection. Then dilute each dose of cloxacillin in
5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5 % glucose in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or
5% glucose in children 20 kg and over and in adults.
(c)Improvement criteria include: fever reduction, diminished respiratory distress, improved SpO2, improved appetite and/or
activity.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Asthma
 
 
 
 
Asthma is a chronic inﬂammatory disorder of the airways associated with airway hyperresponsiveness that leads to
recurrent episodes of wheezing, breathlessness, chest tightness and coughing. These episodes are usually associated
with airﬂow obstruction within the lung, often reversible, either spontaneously or with treatment.
 
Factors that precipitate/aggravate asthma include: allergens, infection, exercise, drugs (aspirin), tobacco, etc.
 
In young children, most initial episodes of asthma-like symptoms are associated with a respiratory tract infection, with
no symptoms between infections. Wheezing episodes usually become less frequent with time; most of these children
do not develop asthma.Asthma attack (acute asthma)
Chronic asthma
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Asthma attack (acute asthma)
Asthma attack is a substantial worsening of asthma symptoms. The severity and duration of attacks are variable and
unpredictable.
Assessment of the severity of asthma attack
The severity of the asthma attack must be rapidly evaluated by the following clinical criteria. Not all signs are
necessarily present.
 
Assessment of severity in children over 2 years and adults
 
 
Treatment
Treatment and follow-up depend on the severity of the attack and the patient’s response:
Mild to moderate attackMild to moderate attack Severe attack Life threatening attack
Able to talk in sentences
Respiratory rate (RR)
Children 2-5 years ≤ 40/minute
Children > 5 years ≤ 30/minute
Heart rate
Children 2-5 years ≤ 140/minute
Children > 5 years ≤ 125/minute
and
No criteria of severityCannot complete sentences in
one breath
or
Too breathless to talk or feed
RR
Children 2-5 years > 40/minute
Children > 5 years > 30/minute
Adults ≥ 25/minute
Heart rate
Children 2-5 years > 140/minute
Children > 5 years > 125/minute
Adults ≥ 110/minute
SpO ≥ 92% 2Altered level of consciousness
(drowsiness, confusion, coma)
Exhaustion
Silent chest
Paradoxical thoracoabdominal
movement
Cyanosis
Collapse
Bradycardia in children or
arrhythmia/hypotension in adults
SpO< 92% 2 
Reassure the patient; place him in a 1/2 sitting position.
Administer:
salbutamol (aerosol): 2 to 4 puffs every 20 to 30 minutes, up to 10 puffs if necessary during the ﬁrst hour. In
children, use a spacerto ease administration (use face mask in children under 3 years). Single puffs should be
given one at a time, let the child breathe 4 to 5 times from the spacer before repeating the procedure. a 
prednisolone PO: one dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg
If the attack is completely resolved: observe the patient for 1 hour (4 hours if he lives far from the health centre)
then give outpatient treatment: salbutamol for 24 to 48 hours (2 to 4 puffs every 4 to 6 hours depending on clinical
evolution) and prednisolone PO (1 to 2 mg/kg once daily) to complete 3 days of treatment.
If the attack is only partially resolved, continue with salbutamol 2 to 4 puffs every 3 to 4 hours if the attack is mild;
6 puffs every 1 to 2 hours if the attack is moderate, until symptoms subside, then when the attack is completely
resolved, proceed as above.
If symptoms worsen or do not improve, treat as severe attack.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Severe attack
In the case of vomiting, until the patient can tolerate oral prednisolone, use hydrocortisone IV:
Children 1 month to < 5 years: 4 mg/kg every 6 hours (max. 100 mg per dose)
Children 5 years and over and adults: 100 mg every 6 hours 
Life-threatening attack (intensive care)
 
The two solutions can be mixed in the nebuliser reservoir.
 
 
Notes:Hospitalise the patient; place him in a 1/2 sitting position.
Administer:
oxygen continuously, at least 5 litres/minute or maintain the SpO between 94 and 98%. 2
salbutamol (aerosol): 2 to 4 puffs every 20 to 30 minutes, up to 10 puffs if necessary in children under 5 years,
up to 20 puffs in children over 5 years and adults. Use a spacer to increase effectiveness, irrespective of age.
or salbutamol (solution for nebulisation), see Life-threatening attack.
prednisolone PO: one dose of 1 to 2 mg/kg
If the attack is completely resolved, observe the patient for at least 4 hours. Continue the treatment
with salbutamol for 24 to 48 hours (2 to 4 puffs every 4 hours) and prednisolone PO (1 to 2 mg/kg once daily) to
complete 3 days of treatment.
Reassess after 10 days: consider long-term treatment if the asthma attacks have been occurring for several
months. If the patient is already receiving long-term treatment, reassess the severity of the asthma (see table) and
review compliance and correct use of medication and adjust treatment if necessary.
If symptoms worsen or do not improve, see Life-threatening attack.
Insert an IV line.
Administer:
oxygen continuously, at least 5 litres/minute or maintain the SpO between 94 and 98%. 2
salbutamol + ipratropium nebuliser solutions using a nebuliser:
Children 1 month to < 5 years salbutamol 2.5 mg + ipratropium 0.25 mg every 20 to 30 minutes
Children 5 to < 12 years salbutamol 2.5 to 5 mg + ipratropium 0.25 mg every 20 to 30 minutes
Children 12 years and over
and adultssalbutamol 5 mg + ipratropium 0.5 mg every 20 to 30 minutes
corticosteriods (prednisolone PO or hydrocortisone IV) as for severe attack.
If the attack is resolved after one hour: switch to salbutamol aerosol and continue prednisolone PO as for severe
attack.
If symptoms do not improve after one hour:
administer a single dose of magnesium sulfate by IV infusion in 0.9% sodium chloride over 20 minutes,
monitoring blood pressure:
Children over 2 years: 40 mg/kg
Adults: 1 to 2 g
continue salbutamol by nebulisation and corticosteriods, as above.
In pregnant women, treatment is the same as for adults. In mild or moderate asthma attacks, administering oxygen
reduces the risk of foetal hypoxia.
For all patients, irrespective of the severity of the asthma attack, look for underlying lung infection and treat
accordingly.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Footnotes
(a)If a conventional spacer is not available, use a 500 ml plastic bottle: insert the mouthpiece of the inhaler into a hole made in
the bottom of the bottle (the seal should be as tight as possible). The child breathes from the mouth of the bottle in the
same way as he would with a spacer. The use of a plastic cup instead of a spacer is not recommended (ineffective).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chronic asthma
Clinical features
 
Patients with typical symptoms of asthma and a history of disease that is characteristic of asthma should be
considered as having asthma after exclusion of other diagnoses.
 
The assessment of the frequency of daytime and nigthtime symptoms and limitations of physical activity determines
whether asthma is intermittent or persistent.
Treatment
Only patients with persistent asthma need long-term treatment. The mainstay of treatment is inhaled corticosteroids.
Treatment is started at the step most appropriate to initial severity then, re-evaluated and adjusted according to
clinical response. It aims to abolish symptoms with the lowest possible dose of inhaled corticosteroids. An intervening
severe exacerbation or loss of control necessitates reassessment to re-evaluate treatment.
 
Long-term treatment does not mean treatment for life. Asthma attacks may occur over months or years, with
intervening asymptomatic intervals when long-term treatment is not required.
 
Long-term treatment of asthma according to severity
 Asthma should be suspected in patients with episodic respiratory symptoms (wheezing, chest tightness, shortness
of breath and/or cough) of variable frequency, severity and duration, disturbing sleep, and causing the patient to sit
up to breathe. These symptoms may appear during or after exercise.
Chest auscultation may be normal or demonstrate diffuse sibilant wheezes.
Atopic disorders or a personal or family history of atopy (eczema, allergic rhinitis/conjunctivitis) or a family history of
asthma increases probability of asthma but their absence does not exclude asthma.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Inhaled corticosteroid treatment: beclometasone dose varies according to the severity of asthma. Find the minimum
dose necessary to both control the symptoms and avoid local and systemic adverse effects:
Children: 50 to 100 micrograms 2 times daily depending on the severity; increase to 200 micrograms 2 times daily if
necessary (max. 800 micrograms daily)
Adults: 100 to 250 micrograms 2 times daily depending on the severity; increase to 500 micrograms 2 times daily if
necessary (max. 1500 micrograms daily)
The number of puffs of beclometasone depends on its concentration in the inhaled aerosol: 50, 100 or 250
micrograms per puff.
 
Do not restrict exercise. If exercise is a trigger for asthma attacks, administer 1 or 2 puffs of salbutamol 10 minutes
beforehand.
 
In pregnant women, poorly controlled asthma increases the risk of pre-eclampsia, eclampsia, haemorrhage, in utero
growth retardation, premature delivery, neonatal hypoxia and perinatal mortality. Long-term treatment remains inhaled
salbutamol and beclometasone at the usual dosage for adults. Whenever possible, avoid oral corticosteroids.
 
If symptoms are not well controlled during a period of at least 3 months, check the inhalation technique and adherence
before changing to a stronger treatment.
 
If symptoms are well controlled for a period of at least 3 months (the patient is asymptomatic or the asthma has
become intermittent): try a step-wise reduction in medication, ﬁnally discontinuing treatment, if it seems possible.
Provide patients with a salbutamol inhaler for any possible attacks. Evaluate after 2 weeks. If the results are
satisfactory, continue for 3 months and then re-evaluate. If the patient has redeveloped chronic asthma, restart long-
term treatment, adjusting doses, as required.Categories Treatment
Intermittent asthma
Day time symptoms < once weekly
Night time symptoms < 2 times monthly
Normal physical activityNo long term treatment
Inhaled salbutamol when symptomatic
Mild persistent asthma
Day time symptoms > once weekly, but
< once daily
Night time symptoms > 2 times monthly
Symptoms may affect activityContinuous treatment with inhaled beclometasone
+
Inhaled salbutamol when symptomatic
Moderate persistent asthma
Daily symptoms
Symptoms affect activity
Night time symptoms > once weekly
Daily use of salbutamolContinuous treatment with inhaled beclometasone
+
Inhaled salbutamol (1 puff 4 times daily)
Severe persistent asthma
Daily symptoms
Frequent night time symptoms
Physical activity limited by symptomsContinuous treatment with inhaled beclometasone
+
Inhaled salbutamol (1-2 puff/s 4 to 6 times daily)
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Pulmonary tuberculosis
Pulmonary tuberculosis is a bacterial infection due to Mycobacterium tuberculosis, spread from person to person
through inhalation of infected respiratory droplets.
After infection, M. tuberculosis multiplies slowly in the lungs and is usually eliminated spontaneously or lies dormant.
Only 10% of cases develop active tuberculosis. The risk of progressing to active tuberculosis is higher in
immunocompromised patients. In certain countries, half of newly diagnosed tuberculosis patients are co-infected with
HIV.
 
For more information on tuberculosis, refer to the guide Tuberculosis, MSF.
Clinical features
 
In an endemic area, the diagnosis of tuberculosis is to be considered, in any patient consulting for respiratory
symptoms for over 2 weeks who does not respond to non-speciﬁc antibacterial treatment.
Laboratory
Treatment
For pulmonary tuberculosis, the standard treatment is a combination of four antituberculosis drugs (isoniazid,
rifampicin, pyrazinamide, ethambutol). The regimen is organised into 2 phases (initial phase and continuation phase) and
lasts 6 months.
 
If the strain is drug-resistant, the treatment is longer and different drug combinations are used.
 
It takes signiﬁcant investment to cure tuberculosis, both from the patient and the medical team. Only uninterrupted
treatment will lead to cure and prevent the development of resistance. It is essential that the patient understands the
importance of treatment adherence and has access to correct case management until treatment is completed.
Prevention
 
References [1] 
Prolonged cough (> 2 weeks) with or without sputum production and/or haemoptysis, prolonged fever, night sweats,
anorexia, weight loss, chest pain and fatigue.
Differential diagnosis includes pneumonia, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD), lung cancer, pulmonary
distomatosis (Flukes, Chapter 6) and melioidosis (Southeast Asia).
In the general population: Xpert® MTB/RIF test which simultaneously detects M. tuberculosis (MTB) in sputum and
resistance to rifampicin (RIF). If not available perform sputum smear microscopy. [2] 
If HIV co-infection suspected or diagnosed: Xpert® MTB/RIF test and point-of-care, urine LF-LAM (lateral ﬂow
urine lipoarabinomannan assay). [2] 
BCG vaccination in neonates: provides 59% protection against pulmonary tuberculosis. [3] 
Infection control in healthcare settings: standard precautions and airborne precautions for conﬁrmed or suspected
cases.
Close contacts: isoniazid preventive therapy for 6 months.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
1.World Health Organization. Global tuberculosis report 2018. 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/274453 [Accessed 21 October 2019]
2.Global Laboratory Initiative. GLI model TB diagnostic algorithms. 2018. 
http://www.stoptb.org/wg/gli/assets/documents/GLI_algorithms.pdf [Accessed 21 October 2019]
3.World Health Organization. Weekly epidemiological record/Relevé épidémiologique hebdomadaire 23rd February 2018,
93rd year/23 Février 2018, 93e année. No 8, 2018, 93, 73–96.
https://www.who.int/immunization/policy/position_papers/bcg/en/ [Accessed 21 October 2019]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 3: Gastrointestinal disorders
Acute diarrhoea
Shigellosis
Amoebiasis
Disorders of the stomach and duodenum
Gastro-oesophageal reﬂux
Gastric and duodenal ulcers in adults
Dyspepsia
Stomatitis
Oral and oropharyngeal candidiasis
Oral herpes
Other infectious causes
Stomatitis from scurvy (vitamin C deﬁciency)
Other lesions resulting from a nutritional deﬁciency
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute diarrhoea
Acute diarrhoea is deﬁned as at least 3 liquid stools per day for less than 2 weeks.
Clinical features
Treatment
General principles:
Prevention and treatment of dehydration 
See Dehydration, Chapter 1.
Adapted treatment protocols are recommended for children with malnutrition (see Severe acute malnutrition, Chapter
1).
Prevention of malnutrition
Continue unrestricted normal diet. In breastfed children, increase the frequency of feeds. Breast milk does not replace
ORS. ORS should be given between feeds.
Zinc supplementationThere are 2 clinical types of acute diarrhoea:
Diarrhoea without blood, caused by viruses in 60% of cases (rotavirus, enterovirus), bacteria (Vibrio cholerae,
enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli, non Typhi Salmonella, Yersinia enterocolitica) or parasites (giardiasis).
Diseases, such as malaria, acute otitis media, respiratory tract infections, etc. can be accompanied by this type
of diarrhoea.
Diarrhoea with blood, caused by bacteria (Shigella in 50% of cases, Campylobacter jejuni, enteroinvasive or
enterohaemorrhagic Escherichia coli, Salmonella) or parasites (intestinal amoebiasis).
Infectious diarrhoeas are transmitted by direct (dirty hands) or indirect (ingestion of contaminated water or food)
contact.
The high mortality rate from diarrhoeal diseases, even benign, is due to acute dehydration and malnutrition. This can
be prevented by adequate rehydration and nutrition.
First assess for signs of dehydration (see Dehydration, Chapter 1).
Then look for other signs:
profuse watery diarrhoea (cholera, enterotoxigenic E. coli),
repeated vomiting (cholera),
fever (salmonellosis, viral diarrhoea),
presence of red blood in stools: see also Shigellosis and Amoebiasis (Chapter 3).
In a patient over 5 years with severe and rapid onset of dehydration, suspect cholera.
Prevent or treat dehydration: rehydration consists of prompt replacement of ﬂuid and electrolyte losses as
required, until the diarrhoea stops.
Administer zinc sulfate to children under 5 years.
Prevent malnutrition.
Do not systematically administer antimicrobials: only certain diarrhoeas require antibiotics (see Antimicrobial
treatment).
Do not administer anti-diarrhoeal drugs or antiemetics.
Treat the underlying condition if any (malaria, otitis, respiratory infection, etc.).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Zinc sulfate is given in combination with oral rehydration solution in order to reduce the duration and severity of
diarrhoea, as well as to prevent further occurrences in the 2 to 3 months after treatment:
zinc sulfate PO
Children under 6 months: 10 mg (½ tablet) once daily for 10 days
Children from 6 months to 5 years: 20 mg (1 tablet) once daily for 10 days
 
Place the half-tablet or full tablet in a teaspoon, add a bit of water to dissolve it, and give the entire spoonful to the
child.
Antimicrobial treatment
Diarrhoea without blood
Most acute diarrhoeas are caused by viruses unresponsive to antimicrobials. Antimicrobials can be beneﬁcial in the
event of cholera or giardiasis.
Diarrhoea with blood
Prevention
 
 
ReferencesCholera: the most important part of treatment is rehydration. In the absence of resistance (perform antibiotic-
sensitivity testing at the beginning of an outbreak), antibiotic treatment shortens the duration of diarrhoea. See the
guide Management of a cholera epidemic, MSF.
Giardiasis: see Intestinal protozoan infections, Chapter 6.
Shigellosis is the most frequent cause of bloody diarrhoea (amoebiasis is much less common). If there is no
laboratory diagnosis to conﬁrm the presence of amoebae, ﬁrst line treatment is for shigellosis (Chapter 3).
Amoebiasis: antiparasitic treatment only if motile Entamoeba histolytica amoebae are found in stools or if a
correct shigellosis treatment has been ineffective (see Amoebiasis, Chapter 3).
Breastfeeding reduces infant morbidity and mortality from diarrhoea and the severity of diarrhoea episodes.
When the child is weaned preparation and storage of food are associated with the risk of contamination by faecal
micro-organisms: discourage bottle-feeding; food must be cooked well; milk or porridge must never be stored at
room temperature.
Access to sufﬁcient amounts of clean water and personal hygiene (washing hands with soap and water before food
preparation and before eating, after defecation etc.) are effective methods of reducing the spread of diarrhoea.
In countries with a high rotavirus diarrhoea fatality rate, the WHO recommends routine rotavirus vaccination in
children between 6 weeks and 24 months of age. [1] 
1.Weekly epidemiological record/Relevé épidémiologique hebdomadaire 1st February 2013, 88th year/1er Février 2013, 88e
année No. 5, 2013, 88, 49–64.
https://www.who.int/wer/2013/wer8805.pdf [Accessed 02 January 2019]This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Shigellosis
Shigellosis is a highly contagious bacterial infection resulting in bloody diarrhoea. There are 4 serogroups of shigella: S.
dysenteriae, S. sonnei, S. ﬂexneri, S. boydii.
S. dysenteriae type 1 (Sd1) is the only strain that causes large scale outbreaks. It has the highest case fatality rate (up
to 10%). 
Patients at risk of death are children under 5 years, malnourished patients, children after measles, adults over 50 years.
Clinical features
Laboratory
Shigellosis in an epidemic context:
Treatment
 
 
 
If resistance or contra-indication to ciproﬂoxacin or if no improvement within 48 hours of starting ﬁrst-line
treatment:Diarrhoea with bright red blood visible in stool, with or without fever   a 
Abdominal and rectal pain frequent
Signs of serious illness: fever above 39 °C; severe dehydration; seizures, altered mental status
Complications (more frequent with Sd1): febrile seizures (5 to 30% of children), rectal prolapse (3%), septicaemia,
intestinal obstruction or perforation, moderate to severe haemolytic uraemic syndrome
Conﬁrm the causal agent (stool culture) and perform antibiotic sensitivity tests.
Perform monthly culture and sensitivity tests (antibiotic resistance can develop rapidly, sometimes during the course
of an outbreak).
Patients with signs of serious illness or with life-threatening risk factors must be admitted as inpatients.
Treat patients with neither signs of serious illness nor risk factors as outpatients.
Antibiotherapy:
First-line treatment
ciproﬂoxacin PO for 3 days
Children: 15 mg/kg 2 times daily
(max. 1 g daily)
Adults: 500 mg 2 times dailyif the strain is sensitive
if there is no antibiotic sensitivity test
if oral administration is possible
ceftriaxone IM for 3 days
Children: 50 to 100 mg/kg once daily
(max. 1 g daily)
Adults: 1 to 2 g once dailyin patients with severe infection and/or oral
administration is not possible
in pregnant women bThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
azithromycin PO for 5 days
Children: one dose of 12 mg/kg on D1 then 6 mg/kg once daily from D2 to D5
Adults: one dose of 500 mg on D1 then 250 mg once daily from D2 to D5
or
ceﬁxime PO for 5 days
Children: 8 mg/kg once daily (max. 400 mg daily)
Adults: 400 mg once daily
 
If there is no improvement 48 hours after starting second-line treatment, treat for amoebiasis .
 
 
 
 
Shigellosis in an epidemic context 
 
References [1] [2] 
For pain and/or fever:
paracetamol PO (see Pain, Chapter 1). All opioid analgesics are contra-indicated as they slow peristalsis.
Supportive therapy:
nutrition: nutritional supplement with frequent meals 
+ 2500 kcal daily during hospitalisation 
+ 1000 kcal daily as outpatients 
rehydration: administration of ORS according to WHO protocols (see Dehydration, Chapter 1).
zinc supplement in children under 5 years (see Acute diarrhoea, Chapitre 3).
Never give loperamide or any other antidiarrhoeal.
Management of complications: rectal prolapse reduction, septicaemia (see Septic shock, Chapter 1), etc.
Isolation of hospitalised patients; school exclusion of children treated as outpatients.
Hygiene (handwashing, hygienic preparation and storage of food, home hygiene, etc.).
Management if signs worsen or bloody diarrhoea in entourage (seek medical attention).
Footnotes
(a)This deﬁnition excludes: blood detected on microscope examination; stool containing digested blood (melaena); streaks of
blood on the surface of normal stool (haemorrhoids, anal or rectal lesion, etc.).
(b)Ciproﬂoxacin should be avoided in pregnant women. Nevertheless, if ceftriaxone is not available, the other antibiotics can
be used, including ciproﬂoxacin if necessary.
 
1.Karen L. Kotloff et al. Seminar: Shigellosis. The Lancet, Volume 391, ISSUE 10122, P801-812, February 24, 2018.
2.Word Health Organization. Pocket book for hospital care in children: guidelines for the management of common childhood
illnesses, 2013.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/81170/9789241548373_eng.pdf;jsessionid=CE5C46916607EF413AA9FCA89B
84163F?sequence=1 [Accessed 20 September 2018]This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Amoebiasis
Amoebiasis is a parasitic infection due to the intestinal protozoa Entamoeba histolytica. Transmission is faecal-oral,
by ingestion of amoebic cysts from food or water contaminated with faeces. Usually, ingested cysts release non-
pathogenic amoebae and 90% of carriers are asymptomatic.
In 10% of infected patients, pathogenic amoebae penetrate the mucous of the colon: this is the intestinal amoebiasis
(amoebic dysentery). The clinical picture is similar to that of shigellosis, which is the principal cause of dysentery.
Occasionally, the pathogenic amoebae migrate via the blood stream and form peripheral abscesses. Amoebic liver
abscess is the most common form of extra-intestinal amoebiasis.
Clinical features
Investigations
TreatmentAmoebic dysentery
diarrhoea containing red blood and mucus
abdominal pain, tenesmus
no fever or moderate fever
possibly signs of dehydration
Amoebic liver abscess
painful hepatomegaly; mild jaundice may be present
anorexia, weight loss, nausea, vomiting
intermittent fever, sweating, chills; change in overall condition
Amoebic dysentery: identiﬁcation of mobile trophozoites (E. histolytica histolytica) in fresh stool samples
Amoebic liver abscess: indirect haemoagglutination and ELISA
POCUS: perform an EFAST (extended focused assessment with sonography for trauma) examination, with
additional views of the liver and spleen to evaluate for signs of amoebic lesions. Contact an expert (local or via
telemedicine services) to help interpret the images and differentiate amoebic abscesses from other pathologies
with similar characteristics. a 
Amoebic dysentery
The presence of cysts alone should not lead to the treatment of amoebiasis.
Amoebiasis conﬁrmed with a parasitological stool examination: 
tinidazole PO
Children: 50 mg/kg once daily for 3 days (max. 2 g daily)
Adults: 2 g once daily for 3 days
or metronidazole PO
Children: 15 mg/kg 3 times daily for 5 days
Adults: 500 mg 3 times daily for 5 days
If there is no laboratory, ﬁrst line treatment for dysentery is for shigellosis. Treat for amoebiasis if correct
treatment for shigellosis has been ineffective.
Oral rehydration salts (ORS) if there is risk of, or if there are signs of dehydration (see Dehydration, Chapter 1).
Amoebic liver abscess
tinidazole PO: same treatment for 5 days
metronidazole PO: same treatment for 5 to 10 daysThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Footnotes
(a)POCUS should only be performed and interpreted by trained clinicians.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Disorders of the stomach and duodenum
 
 
 
 Gastro-oesophageal reﬂux
Gastric and duodenal ulcers in adults
Dyspepsia
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Gastro-oesophageal reﬂux
Clinical features
Burning stomachache or heartburn, generally relieved by antacids; acid regurgitation (often postural: while sitting
forward or lying down). In the absence of dysphagia (oesophageal stenosis), these signs are benign.
Treatment
First instance: encourage the patient to avoid alcohol and tobacco use.
Give aluminium hydroxide/magnesium hydroxide PO (400 mg/400 mg tablet): 1 to 2 tablets 3 times daily 20
minutes to one hour after meals, or 1 tablet during painful attacks. a 
If antacids are insufﬁcient:
omeprazole PO: 20 mg once daily in the morning for 3 days
In young children: no drug treatment, rest and sleep on an incline (30° to 45°).
Footnotes
(a)Aluminium hydroxide/magnesium hydroxide may decrease intestinal absorption of drugs taken at the same time:
•  atazanavir, chloroquine, digoxin, doxycycline, iron  salts, gabapentin, itraconazole, levothyroxine (take at least 2 hours
apart).
•  ciproﬂoxacin (take ciproﬂoxacin 2 hours before or 4 hours after antacids), dolutegravir (take dolutegravir 2 hours before
or 6 hours after antacids), velpatasvir (take 4 hours apart). 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Gastric and duodenal ulcers in adults
Clinical features
Burning epigastric pain or epigastric cramps between meals, that wake the patient at night. Recurrent episodes
characteristically last a few days and are often accompanied by nausea and even vomiting.
The most common complications are perforation and bleeding.
Treatment of non-complicated ulcers
Treatment of complicated ulcers
Perforation
Perforation should be considered in patients presenting with sudden onset intense epigastric pain, particularly if there is
rigidity of the abdominal wall. The risk of peritonitis is increased if the perforation occurs on a full stomach.
Gastrointestinal bleeding
Passing of black stool (maelena) and/or vomiting blood (haematemesis). In 80% of cases the bleeding stops
spontaneously.For an isolated episode: 
identify patients taking NSAID or acetylsalicylic acid; stop treatment;
encourage patients to avoid alcohol and tobacco use;
omeprazole PO: 20 mg once daily in the morning for 7 to 10 days. In severe or recurrent cases, dose can be
increased to 40 mg once daily and the treatment can be prolonged for up to 8 weeks.
If the patient has frequent recurrences unrelated to NSAID use, that require repeated treatment with antiulcer drugs:
see eradication of Helicobacter pylori.
To start: 
place the patient on a strict fast (NPO); insert a nasogastric tube and aspirate if possible;
insert an intravenous line and hydrate (Ringer lactate);
treat acute pain (see Pain, Chapter 1);
omeprazole IV infusion: 40 mg once daily over 20 to 30 minutes
Refer to a surgeon.
If referral not possible, risk of mortality is high:
Continue conservative management including maintenance ﬂuid (alternate 5% glucose and Ringer lactate).
Start IV antibiotics (see Shock, Chapter 1).
If after 3 days, the patient's clinical condition has improved, cautiously restart oral feeding, remove the
nasogastric tube and start PO treatment to eradicate Helicobacter pylori (see eradication of Helicobacter
pylori).
Insert a nasogastric tube for aspiration and insert an IV line (16G).
If the haemodynamic state is stable (pulse and blood pressure are normal):
Hydrate (Ringer lactate), monitor, keep NPO for 12 hours.
If there is no active haemorrhage, restart oral feeding after 12 hours.
Gastric lavage with cold water is not essential, but may help evaluate persistence of bleeding.
If the haemorrhage continues (haematemesis) and/or if the haemodynamic state deteriorates (pulse increases, BP
drops):This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Eradication of Helicobacter pylori
Most peptic ulcers are caused by Helicobacter pylori infection. If a diagnosis of ulcer is probable, treatment to
eradicate H. pylori should be considered if the patient has frequent attacks requiring repeated and/or prolonged
treatments with antiulcer drugs over 8 weeks or in cases of complicated ulcers (perforation or gastrointestinal
bleeding). Infection should be conﬁrmed with a test where possible.
 
H. pylori resistance to antibiotics varies globally, follow national recommendations where available. If not, for
information, administer a triple therapy for 7 days:
omeprazole PO 20 mg 2 times daily + clarithromycin PO 500 mg 2 times daily + amoxicillin PO 1 g 2 times daily.
 
In immunocompromised patients, consider mycobacterium avium complex (MAC) infection or other nontuberculous
mycobacterium (NTM) infection prior to starting a clarithromycin-containing triple therapy.
 
If symptoms continue despite treatment, consider the differential diagnosis of gastric cancer. Refer for investigations
if possible.
 
Notes:
 Intensive care and transfusion according to the severity of the bleeding (see haemorrhagic shock, Chapter 1).
Emergency surgical intervention.
 a 
Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) and NSAID (ibuprofen, diclofenac, etc.) are contra-indicated in patients suffering from
or with a history of ulcers.
Omeprazole is as effective PO as IV.
Footnotes
(a)In penicillin-allergic patients, amoxicillin PO can be substituted with metronidazole PO 500 mg 2 times daily.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Dyspepsia
Last updated: December 2020
 
Clinical features
Epigastric pain or discomfort following meals, often accompanied by bloating, sensation of fullness and nausea.
Dyspepsia is most commonly functional. The diagnosis of functional dyspepsia is based on clinical assessment after
ruling out organic causes (Gastro-oesophageal reﬂux, Gastric and duodenal ulcers, drug-induced symptoms, gastric
cancer). If possible, test for Helicobacter pylori.
Treatment
In adults:
  
Note: consider and treat possible intestinal parasites (see Intestinal protozoan infections, Cestodes, Nematode
infections, Chapter 6; Amoebiasis, Chapter 3).
 
ReferencesIn case of patients who test positive for H. pylori, see Eradication of Helicobacter pylori. [1] 
Omeprazole PO (10 mg once daily) for 4 weeks may help even in H. pylori-negative patients . [2] [3] 
1.Ford AC, Mahadeva S, Carbone MF, Lacy BE, Talley NJ. Functional dyspepsia. Lancet. 2020 Nov 21;396(10263):1689-1702.
2.Moayyedi PM, Lacy BE, Andrews CN, et al. ACG and CAG clinical guideline: management of dyspepsia. Am J Gastroenterol.
2017 Jul;112(7):988-1013.
http://www.cag-acg.org/images/publications/CAG_CPG_Dyspepsia_AJG_Aug2017.pdf [Accessed 24 November 2020]
3.National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. Gastro-oesophageal reﬂux disease and dyspepsia in adults: investigation
and management. Sept 2014.  
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/CG184/chapter/1-Recommendations#interventions-for-functional-
dyspepsia [Accessed 24 November 2020]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Stomatitis
 
 
 
 
Stomatitis is an inﬂammation of the mucous membranes of the mouth caused by a fungal, viral or bacterial infection, a
vitamin deﬁciency, an injury, etc.
Prolonged or painful stomatitis may contribute to dehydration or may cause loss of appetite with denutrition,
particularly in children.
In infants, examine routinely the mouth in the event of breast refusal or difﬁculties in sucking.
 
In all cases:Oral and oropharyngeal candidiasis
Oral herpes
Other infectious causes
Stomatitis from scurvy (vitamin C deﬁciency)
Other lesions resulting from a nutritional deﬁciency
Maintain adequate hydration and feeding; offer foods that will not irritate the mucosa (soft, non-acidic). Use a
nasogastric tube for a few days if pain is preventing the patient from eating.
Keep the mouth clean to prevent complications and recurrence.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Oral and oropharyngeal candidiasis
Infection due to Candida albicans, common in infants, immunocompromised or diabetic patients. Other risk factors
include treatment with oral antibiotics or high-dose inhaled corticosteroids.
Clinical features
Treatment
nystatin oral suspension for 7 days
Children and adults: 400 000 IU daily, i.e. 1 ml of the oral suspension (100 000 IU) 4 times daily
or 
miconazole oral gel for 7 days
Children 6 months to 2 years: 1.25 ml 4 times daily
Children over 2 years and adults: 2.5 ml 4 times daily
 
Apply the oral suspension of nystatin or the oral gel of miconazole between meals; keep in the mouth for 2 to 3
minutes, then swallow. In young children, apply to the tongue and inside of each cheek.
 
Show the mother how to treat since, in most cases, candidiasis will be treated at home.
 
In immunocompromised patients: see HIV infection and AIDS, Chapter 8.White patches on the tongue, inside the cheeks, that may spread to the pharynx.
In patients with frequent recurrences or extensive forms invading the esophagus (swallowing difﬁculty and pain),
consider HIV infection.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Oral herpes
Infection due to the herpes simplex virus. Primary infection typically occurs in children aged 6 months to 5 years and
may cause acute gingivostomatitis, sometimes severe. After primary infection, the virus remains in the body and
causes in some individuals periodic recurrences which are usually benign (herpes labialis).
Clinical features
Multiple vesicles on the oral mucosa and lips which rupture to form painful, yellowish, at times extensive ulcers.
Local lesions are usually associated with general malaise, regional lymphadenopathy and fever.
Clusters of vesicles at the junction between the lip and the skin.
 
In patients with frequent recurrences or extensive forms, consider HIV infection (see HIV infection and AIDS, Chapter
8).
Treatment
Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis
 
In immunocompromised patients: see HIV infection and AIDS, Chapter 8.
Recurrent herpes labialis
Spontaneous resolution within 7 to 10 days. An antiseptic (chlorhexidine or povidone iodine) may be applied;
paracetamol PO if necessary.
 
Both forms of herpes are contagious: do not touch lesions (or wash hands afterwards); avoid oral contact.Primary herpetic gingivostomatitis
Recurrent herpes labialis
Treat pain: paracetamol or ibuprofen PO (Chapter 1)
In the event of severe lesions, inability to drink and signiﬁcant pain:
Admit the child to hospital (high risk of dehydration).
If the child presents within the ﬁrst 96 hours of symptoms onset, aciclovir PO for 5 to 7 days:
Children under 2 years: 200 mg 5 times daily
Children 2 years and over and adults: 400 mg 5 times daily
In the event of secondary bacterial infection: amoxicillin PO 7 days.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Other infectious causes
 
 
See Pharyngitis (Chapter 2), Diphtheria (Chapter 2), Measles (Chapter 8).
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Stomatitis from scurvy (vitamin C deﬁciency)
Clinical features
Bleeding gums, associated in infants with lower limb pain caused by subperiosteal haemorrhage. It is common in
contexts of poor food quality or in populations completely dependent on food aid (refugee camps).
Treatment
ascorbic acid (vitamin C) PO
The optimal dose has not been established. For information:
Children 1 month to 11 years: 100 mg 3 times daily 
Children 12 years and over and adults: 250 mg 3 times daily 
or
Children 1 month to 3 years: 100 mg 2 times daily
Children 4 to 11 years: 250 mg 2 times daily 
Children 12 years and over and adults: 500 mg 2 times daily 
 
Treatment is administred at least 2 weeks or longer (until symptoms resolve), then preventive treatment is
given (children and adults: 50 mg daily as long as the situation requires).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Other lesions resulting from a nutritional
deﬁciency
 
 
Other vitamin deﬁciencies may provoke mouth lesions: angular stomatitis of the lips and glossitis from vitamin
B (riboﬂavin), niacin (see Pellagra, Chapter 4) or vitamin B (pyridoxine) deﬁciencies.
 
Iron deﬁciency may also provoke angular stomatitis (see Anaemia, Chapter 1).
 
Give the corresponding vitamins at curative doses. Multivitamins are insufﬁcient to treat true vitamin deﬁciencies.2 6
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 4: Skin diseases
Dermatology
Scabies
Lice (pediculosis)
Superﬁcial fungal infections
Bacterial skin infections
Impetigo
Furuncles and carbuncles
Erysipelas and cellulitis
Cutaneous anthrax
Endemic treponematoses
Leprosy
Herpes simplex and herpes zoster
Herpes simplex
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Other skin disorders
Eczema
Seborrheic dermatitis
Urticaria
Pellagra
 
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Dermatology
 
 
Skin diseases, particularly infectious skin diseases, are very common. They must be treated individually or collectively,
but must also be considered as indicators of the sanitary condition of a population. A high prevalence of infectious skin
diseases may reﬂect a problem of insufﬁcient water quantity and lack of hygiene in a population.
Dermatological examination
 
Patients with skin disease often present late. At this stage, primary lesions and speciﬁc signs may be masked by
secondary infection. In these cases, it is necessary to re-examine the patient, after treating the secondary infection, in
order to identify and treat the underlying skin disease.Observe the type of lesion:
Macule: ﬂat, non palpable lesion that is different in colour than the surrounding skin
Papule: small (< 1 cm) slightly elevated, circumscribed, solid lesion
Vesicle (< 1 cm), bulla (> 1 cm): clear ﬂuid-ﬁlled blisters
Pustule: vesicle containing pus
Nodule: ﬁrm, elevated palpable lesion (> 1 cm) that extend into the dermis or subcutaneous tissue
Erosion: loss of the epidermis that heals without leaving a scar
Excoriation: erosion caused by scratching
Ulcer: loss of the epidermis and at least part of the dermis that leaves a scar
Scale: ﬂake of epidermis that detaches from the skin surface
Crust: dried serum, blood, or pus on the skin surface
Atrophy: thinning of the skin
Licheniﬁcation: thickening of the skin with accentuation of normal skin markings
Look at the distribution of the lesions over the body; observe their arrangement: isolated, clustered, linear, annular
(in a ring). Ask if the lesions are itchy.
Look for a possible cause: insect bites; scabies, lice, other parasitic skin infections; contact with plants, animals,
jewellery, detergents, etc.
Ask about any past or ongoing treatment: topical, oral or parenteral.
Look for local or regional signs (secondary infection, lymphangitis, adenopathy, erysipelas) and/or systemic signs
(fever, septicaemia, secondary focus).
Consider the sanitary conditions of the family, particularly for contagious skin diseases (scabies, scalp ringworm,
lice).
Check tetanus vaccination status.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Scabies
Scabies is a cutaneous parasitosis due to the presence of the mite Sarcoptes scabiei hominis within the epidermis. It
exists in two forms: ordinary scabies, relatively benign and moderately contagious; and crusted scabies, favoured by
immune deﬁciency, extremely contagious and refractory to conventional treatment.
Person to person transmission takes place chieﬂy through direct skin contact, and sometimes by indirect contact
(sharing clothing, bedding). The challenge in management is that it must include simultaneous treatment of both the
patient and close contacts, and at the same time, decontamination of clothing and bedding of all persons undergoing
treatment, in order to break the transmission cycle.
Clinical features
Ordinary scabies
In older children and adults
and
and/or
 
Typical lesions and secondary lesions may co-exist, or speciﬁc lesions may be entirely masked by secondary lesions.
In infants and young children
Crusted (Norwegian) scabies
Thick, scaly, erythematous plaques, generalised or localised, resembling psoriasis, with or without itching (50% of
cases). Delay in diagnosis may lead to a scabies epidemic.
Treatment
In all cases
Ordinary scabiesItching, worse at night, very suggestive of scabies if close contacts have the same symptom
Typical skin lesions:
Scabies burrows (common): ﬁne wavy lines of 5 to 15 mm, corresponding to the tunnels made by the parasite
within the skin. Burrows are most often seen in the interdigital spaces of the hand and ﬂexor aspect of the wrist,
but may be present on the areolae, buttocks, elbows, axillae. The back and the face are spared. Burrows may
be associated with vesicles, corresponding to the entry point of the parasite in the skin.
Scabies nodules (less common): reddish-brown nodules, measuring 2 to 20 mm, on the genitals in men, persisting
after effective treatment (they are not necessarily indicative of active infection).
Secondary skin lesions: resulting from scratching (excoriations, crusts) or super-infection (impetigo).
Vesicular eruption; often involving palms and soles, back, face, and limbs. Secondary infection or eczematisation is
frequent. Isolated scabies nodules in the axillae may be the only manifestation.
Examination of the mother’s hands may support the diagnosis. 
Close contacts of the patient are treated simultaneously, even in the absence of symptoms.
Clothing and bedding (including that of contacts) are changed after each treatment. They are washed at ≥ 60 °C
then dried in the sun, or exposed to sunlight for 72 hours, or sealed in a plastic bag for 72 hours.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Topical treatment
Topical scabicides are applied over the entire body (including the scalp, post-auricular areas, umbilicus, palms and
soles), avoiding mucous membranes and face, and the breasts in breastfeeding women. Particular attention should be
paid to common infestation sites. The recommended contact time should not be shortened or exceeded; the patient
must not wash his hands while the product is in use (or the product should be reapplied if the hands are washed). In
children under 2 years, the hands must be wrapped to prevent accidental ingestion of the product and contact with
eyes. Topical scabicides should not be applied to broken or inﬂamed skin. Treatment of secondary bacterial infection,
if present, should be initiated 24 to 48 hours before use of topical scabicides (see Impetigo).
 
The preferred treatment is 5% permethrin cream:
Children 2 months and over and adults: one application, with a contact time of 8 hours, then rinse thoroughly. Repeat
the application after 7 days.
 
or, if not available, 25% benzyl benzoate lotion:
See the table below for dilution (depending on age), contact time and number of applications.
 
Oral treatment
Treatment with ivermectin PO (200 micrograms/kg single dose) is an alternative: it is more practical than topical
treatment (e.g. in the case of an epidemic or for treating contacts) and can be started right away in the case of
secondary infection. A single dose may be sufﬁcient; a second dose 7 days later reduces the risk of treatment failure.
 
Ivermectin is not recommended for children < 15 kg or pregnant women (safety not established).
Administration of ivermectin to patients with loiasis carries a risk of severe neurological complications when signiﬁcant
Loa loa microﬁlaraemia is present (see Filariasis, Chapter 6).
 
ivermectin PO single dose: Children
< 2 yearsChildren
2 to 12 yearsChildren
> 12 years
and adultsPregnant
women
DilutionLotion must be
diluted before use:
1 part 25% lotion +
3 parts waterLotion must be
diluted before
use:
1 part 25%
lotion + 1 part
waterUse undiluted
25% lotionUse undiluted
25% lotion
Contact time12 hours (6 hours
for infants
< 6 months)
then rinse
thoroughly24 hours then
rinse thoroughly24 hours then
rinse thoroughly12 hours then
rinse thoroughly
Number of applications One applicationTwo applications (e.g. 24 hours
apart, with a rinse between the 2
applications; or 2 successive
applications, 10 minutes apart,
when the ﬁrst application has dried
with a rinse after 24 hours) One application
 a 
 b  This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Treatment effectiveness is judged on clinical grounds. Itching may persist for 1 to 3 weeks after elimination of the
parasite.
 
Persistence of typical burrows beyond 4 weeks should lead to suspicion of treatment failure (insufﬁcient treatment,
e.g. the scalp was not included in topical treatment or the patient washed his hands during the treatment period), or
early re-infestation (contacts and environment not treated). In these cases, patient and contacts should be retreated.
 
Persistent itching may be due to another condition, initially masked by scabies.
Crusted scabies
Treatment combines simultaneous administration of oral ivermectin and topical scabicide at regular intervals, e.g. every
week for 2 to 3 weeks or more, according to severity and clinical response.
 
Crusts should be softened (salicylic acid ointment) and removed before applying local treatment (otherwise, local
treatment is ineffective).
 
As exfoliated skin scales may spread the parasite, the patient should be isolated during the treatment, staff should use
protection (gloves, gowns and hand washing after contact), and environment (bedding, ﬂoors and surfaces) should be
decontaminated.
 Weight 15 to 24 kg 25 to 35 kg 36 to 50 kg 51 to 65 kg
Ivermectin 3 mg tab 1 tab 2 tab 3 tab 4 tab
Footnotes
(a)Treatment with ivermectin in these patients is reserved for severe cases for which no alternative exists (see Crusted
scabies).
(b)In areas where loiasis is endemic, certain precautions are recommended before administering ivermectin: e.g. measure the
Loa loa microﬁlaraemia, if possible, or ensure that the patient has no history of loiasis (migration of an adult worm under the
conjunctiva or transient « Calabar » swellings), nor history of severe adverse reactions following a previous treatment with
ivermectin, or if in doubt, use topical treatment in preference to oral.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Lice (pediculosis)
Pediculosis is a benign contagious parasitic infection due to 3 species of lice speciﬁc to humans: head lice, body lice
and pubic lice. Transmission from person to person occurs through direct or indirect contact.
Body lice are potential vectors of relapsing fever (Chapter 7), typhus (Eruptive rickettsioses, Chapter 7) and trench
fever.
Clinical features
Treatment
Head lice
Body lice
Mass treatment (outbreak)
Apply 30 to 60 g (2 to 4 heaped soup spoons) of 0.5% permethrin powder to the inside of the clothes and
underclothes in contact with the skin (front and back, neck and waistline, sleeves and socks) in a fully clothed patient,
then rub in the powder by hand. Leave for 12 to 24 hours.
Treat other clothing (including headwear) and bedding in a plastic bag with 0.5% permethrin powder. Repeat in 8 to 10
days if the infestation persists.Head lice mainly affect children: itching and scratch marks (nape of neck and around the ears), which may become
secondarily infected (impetigo) in prolonged infestation; presence of live lice and/or live (shiny, grey) nits attached to
the hair shaft within 5 mm of the scalp.
Body lice mainly affect populations living under poor conditions (refugees, prisoners, the homeless): itching and
scratch marks (back, belt line and armpits), often inﬂamed and infected; presence of lice and nits in the clothing
(parasites are not found on the body).
Pubic lice are considered to be a sexually transmitted infection (STI): itching and scratch marks (pubic and perianal
area), but other hairy areas may also be affected (armpits, thighs, eyelashes); lice and nits at the base of the hair
shaft, rarely visible.
Examine contacts; check for associated systemic infection (body lice) or STI (pubic lice).
Apply lotion to scalp and dry hair, paying particular attention to the areas behind the ears and around the nape of the
neck. Do not reduce or exceed the recommended duration of application.
4% dimeticone lotion
Children 6 months and over and adults: leave on hair for 8 hours, then rinse thoroughly. 
Keep away from ﬂames and/or intense heat sources (including cigarettes) during application and until rinsing (risk of
ignition).
or, if dimeticone is not available or in children 2 to 6 months:
1% permethrin lotion. 
Children 2 months and over and adults: leave on hair for 10 minutes, then rinse thoroughly.
Repeat application of either treatment after 7 days.
Decontaminate combs, headwear and bedding (wash ≥ 60 °C/30 minutes, iron or dry in the sun or, if not feasible,
seal in a plastic bag for 2 weeks).
Treat as above contacts with live lice and/or live nits. Do not treat those with dead nits alone (dull, white, > 1 cm
from scalp).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Individual treatment
Disinfection of clothing and bedding as above or as for head lice.
Pubic lice
Shave and/or apply 1% permethrin lotion to hairy areas (as for head lice). Treat the partner at the same time.
Decontaminate clothing and bedding (as for head lice). Repeat the application after 7 days.
Treatment of secondary bacterial infection, if present, should begin 24 to 48 hours before local antiparasitic treatment
(see Impetigo); local treatment is applied later when tolerated.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Superﬁcial fungal infections
Superﬁcial fungal infections are benign infections of the skin, scalp and nails caused by Candida albicans or
dermatophytes.
Clinical features and treatment
Candidiasis
Candidal diaper dermatitis
Erythema of the perianal area with peripheral desquamation and sometimes pustules. Secondary infection may
develop.
Other candidiasis
Dermatophytoses
Dermatophytes cause various clinical lesions, depending on the anatomic site involved: scalp, glabrous (hairless) skin,
folds or nails.
 Buttocks must be kept clean (ordinary soap and water) and dry.
Avoid humidity: according to the context, expose the buttocks to air or change diapers more frequently; remove
plastic pants.
Protect the skin with zinc oxide ointment if diarrhoea is present.
If diaper dermatitis is severe and persistent despite these measures, consider an intestinal infection (nystatin PO:
100 000 IU 4 times daily for 20 days).
Candidiasis of skin folds: miconazole 2% cream, one application 2 times daily for 2 to 4 weeks
Oral candidiasis: see Stomatitis, Chapter 3.
Vulvovaginal candidiasis: see Abnormal vaginal discharge, Chapter 9.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Anatomic
site (a)Clinical features Treatment
Scalp
Scalp ringworm
Tinea capitisCommon in children. Depending on the species:
• One or more round, scaly, erythematous plaques with
the ends of broken hairs.
• Inﬂammation, suppuration, crusting and peripheral
lymphadenopathy (kerion).
• Permanent hair loss (favus).
Some scalp ringworms are contagious:
simultaneously examine (and treat) symptomatic
contacts.• Shave or cut hair short on and around
the lesions.
• Local treatment: 2 times daily, clean
with soap and water, dry and apply
miconazole 2% cream or Whitﬁeld’s
ointment for 2 weeks or longer if
necessary.
• Administer systemic treatment as
local treatment alone does not cure
scalp ringworm:
griseofulvin PO for 6 weeks minimum
(up to 8 to 12 weeks)
Children 1 to 12 years: 10 to 20 mg/kg
once daily (max. 500 mg daily)
Children ≥ 12 years and adults: 500 mg
to 1 g once daily, depending on
severity
or itraconazole PO
Children: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 4
to 6 weeks (max. 200 mg daily)
Adults: 200 mg once daily for 2 to 4
weeks
• Suppurative lesions: treat
superinfection (see Impetigo) before
applying local antifungal treatment.
• For painful kerion: paracetamol PO.
In pregnant lactating/breastfeeding
women: oral antifungals are
contraindicated. Apply a topical
treatment (miconazole 2% cream or
Whitﬁeld’s ointment) to limit the
spread of infection until it is possible
to treat orally.
Glabrous skin
Ringworm of the
body
Tinea corporisErythematous, scaly, pruritic macule with a well-
demarcated, raised, vesicular border and central
healing.• For non widespread, localised tinea:
Local treatment: 2 times daily, clean
with soap and water, dry and apply
miconazole 2% cream or Whitﬁeld’s
ointment for 2 to 4 weeks or for 2
weeks after clinical resolution.
• Reserve oral antifungals for
particularly extensive lesions:
griseofulvin PO for 4 to 6 weeks or
itraconazole for 2 weeks.
Folds • Interdigital spaces (Tinea pedis): Topical treatment as above. If oozingThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Tinea pedis
(athlete’s foot)
Tinea crurisPruritus, ﬁssure and whitish scales in the 3and/or 4
interdigital spaces.
• Groin (Tinea cruris):
Circumscribed, pruritic, erythematous plaque, with a
pale centre surrounded by vesiculo- pustules, extending
outward from the groin.rd th
 (b)  lesions, use miconazole 2% cream
only (do not use Whitﬁeld’s ointment).
(a)Dermatophytosis may affect the nails (Tinea unguium, onychomycosis). Treatment is prolonged (12 to 18 months with
griseofulvin) thus, in practice, difﬁcult. Failures and relapses are frequent.
(b)In candidal intertrigo, lesions are usually located in the 1st and 2nd interdigital spaces.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Bacterial skin infections
 
 
 
 Impetigo
Furuncles and carbuncles
Erysipelas and cellulitis
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Impetigo
Impetigo is a benign, contagious infection of the epidermis due to group A ß-haemolytic streptococcus
and Staphylococcus aureus. Co-infection is common. Transmission is by direct contact. Lack of water, and poor
hygiene, increase spread.
Primary infections are most common in children. Secondary infections complicating preexisting pruritic dermatoses
(lice, scabies, eczema, herpes, chickenpox, etc.) are more common in adults.
Clinical features
Treatment
 
 Non bullous impetigo (classic form): ﬂaccid vesicle on erythematous skin which becomes pustular and forms a
yellowish crust. Different stages o the infection may be present simultaneously. The lesion does not leave a scar.
The most common sites of infection are around the nose and mouth, on the limbs or on the scalp.
Bullous impetigo: large ﬂaccid bullae and erosions of the skin in the ano-genital region in newborns and infants.
Ecthyma: an ulcerative form of impetigo that leaves scars. This form is most common in the immunocompromised
(e.g. HIV infection, malnutrition), diabetics and alcoholics.
Regardless of the type of impetigo: absence of fever or systemic signs.
Possible complications:
abscess, pyodermitis, cellulitis, lymphangitis, osteomyelitis, septicaemia;
acute glomerulonephritis (routinely look for signs of glomerulonephritis).
Localised non bullous impetigo (max. 5 lesions in a single skin area):
Clean with soap and water and dry before applying mupirocin.
2% mupirocin ointment: one application 3 times daily for 7 days. Reassess after 3 days. If there is no response,
switch to oral antibiotic therapy (see below).
Keep ﬁngernails short. Avoid touching the lesions, keep them covered with gauze if possible.
Extensive non bullous impetigo (more than 5 lesions or impetigo involving more than one skin area), bullous
impetigo, ecthyma, impetigo with abscess; immunocompromised patient; topical treatment failure:
Clean with soap and water and dry 2 to 3 times daily.
Keep ﬁngernails short. Avoid touching the lesions, keep them covered with gauze if possible.
Incise abscesses if present.
Administer oral antibiotic therapy: 
cefalexin PO for 7 days
Neonates under 7 days: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Neonates 7 to 28 days: 25 mg/kg 3 times daily
Children 1 month to 12 years: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children 12 years and over and adults: 1 g 2 times daily
or
cloxacillin PO for 7 days
Children over 10 years: 15 mg/kg 3 times daily (max. 3 g daily)
Adults: 1 g 3 times daily
Note: in newborns with lesions located around the umbilicus, administer cloxacilllin IV. a 
For all patients:
Quarantine from school (children can return to school after 24 to 48 hours of antibiotic therapy).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 Look for and treat any underlying dermatosis: lice, scabies, eczema, herpes, scalp ringworm, or an ENT
infection.
Trace and treat contacts.
Check for proteinuria (use urine dipstick) 3 weeks after the infection.
Footnotes
(a)In penicillin-allergic patients only (resistance to macrolides is common), azithromycin PO for 3 days (children: 10 mg/kg once
daily; adults: 500 mg once daily).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Furuncles and carbuncles
Necrotising perifollicular infection, usually due to Staphylococcus aureus. Risk factors include: nasal carriage of S.
aureus, maceration, breaks in the skin, poor hygiene; diabetes mellitus, malnutrition, iron deﬁciency or
immunodeﬁciency.
Clinical features
Treatment
 
 
 Furuncle: red, warm, painful nodule with a central pustule, usually around a hair follicle. It becomes ﬂuctuant,
discharges a core of purulent exudate, and leaves a depressed scar. It occurs most frequently on the thighs, groin,
buttocks, armpits, neck and back. There is no fever.
Carbuncle: a cluster of interconnected furuncles, sometimes with fever and peripheral lymphadenopathy. It leaves a
depressed scar.
Single furuncle:
Clean with soap and water 2 times daily and cover with a dry dressing.
Apply warm moist compresses to the furuncle in order to encourage it to drain.
After drainage, clean and apply a dry dressing until the lesion has healed.
Furuncle on the face, multiple furuncles, carbuncles or in immunocompromised patients:
Same local care.
Add systematically an antibiotic for 7 days: 
cefalexin PO
Neonates under 7 days: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Neonates 7 to 28 days: 25 mg/kg 3 times daily
Children 1 month to 12 years: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children 12 years and over and adults: 1 g 2 times daily
or 
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO. Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1. The dose is expressed
in amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 
Ratio 8:1: 2000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 1750 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times daily) a 
In all cases: wash hand frequently, wash bedding.
Footnotes
(a)For penicillin-allergic patients:
clindamycin PO (children: 10 mg/kg 3 times daily; adults: 600 mg 3 times daily)This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Erysipelas and cellulitis
Last updated: October 2020
 
 
Acute skin infections, due to bacteria (usually Group A beta-haemolytic streptococcus and sometimes
Staphylococcus aureus, including methicillin resistant S. aureus–MRSA) that enter through a break in the skin.
The main risk factors are: venous insufﬁciency, obesity, oedema or lymphoedema, history of erysipelas or cellulitis,
immunosuppression and cutaneous inﬂammation (e.g. dermatosis, wound).
Erysipelas is a superﬁcial infection (affecting the dermis and superﬁcial lymph vessels), while cellulitis affects the deeper
tissues (deep dermis layers and subcutaneous fat).
Generally, these infections affect the lower extremities and sometimes the face. If the orbital and periorbital tissues
are infected, see Periorbital and orbital cellulitis, Chapter 5. If the infection is perifollicular, see Furuncles and
carbuncles, Chapter 4.
Clinical signs
Paraclinical investigations
Treatment
 Warm, tender, swollen well–demarcated erythematous plaque.
Fever, lymphadenopathy and lymphangitis.
Look for a portal of entry (bite, ulcer, wound, intertrigo, eczema, fungal infection, etc.).
In case of intense pain disproportionate to the skin lesion, hypoesthesia, rapidly progressing local signs, crepitation,
skin necrosis or critically ill appearing patient, consider necrotising fasciitis that is a surgical emergency
(see Necrotising infections of the skin and soft tissues, Chapter 10).
Other complications: septicaemia (see Septic shock, Chapter 1), acute glomerulonephritis, osteomyelitis, septic
arthritis.
The main differential diagnoses include: contact dermatitis, stasis dermatitis due to venous insufﬁciency, venous
thrombosis and erythema migrans characteristic of Lyme disease.
Ultrasound: can detect signs of cellulitis and rule out an underlying abscess, deep vein thrombosis or a foreign body.
Radiography: can detect a foreign body, underlying osteomyelitis (or gas in the subcutaneous tissue in case of a
necrotising infection, nevertheless the absence of gas does not rule out this diagnosis).
Test for proteinuria with urine dipstick 3 weeks after infection to look for glomerulonephritis.
In all cases:
Outline the area of erythema with a pen in order to follow the infection. a 
Bed rest, elevation of affected area (e.g. leg). 
Treatment of pain (Chapter 1). Avoid NSAIDs that may increase the risk of necrotising fasciitis.
Administer antibiotics: either orally or IV depending on severity.
Treat portal of entry and comorbidities.
Check and/or catch up tetanus vaccination (see Tetanus, Chapter 7).
In case of necrotising fasciitis, septic arthritis or osteomyelitis: urgent transfer to a surgical centre, initiate IV
antibiotic treatment while awaiting transfer.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 
In the event of worsening clinical signs after 48 hours of antibiotic treatment, consider IV route.
 
If there is clinical improvement after 48 hours (afebrile and erythema and oedema have improved) switch to
cefalexin or amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO at the doses indicated above to complete 7 to 10 days of treatment.
After 48 hours, change to clindamycin PO at the doses indicated above to complete 7 to 10 days of treatment.
 Hospitalize for the following: children younger than 3 months, critically ill appearing patient, local complications,
debilitated patient (chronic conditions, the elderly) or if there is a risk of non-compliance with or failure of outpatient
treatment. Treat other patients as outpatients. b 
Outpatient antibiotherapy: 
cefalexin PO for 7 to 10 days
Children 1 month to under 12 years: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children 12 years and over and adults: 1 g 2 times daily
or
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO for 7 to 10 days. 
Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults:
Ratio 8:1: 2000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 1750 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times daily) c  
Inpatient antibiotherapy: d 
First line therapy: 
cloxacillin IV infusion over 60 minutes
Children 1 month to under 12 years: 12.5 to 25 mg/kg every 6 hours
Children 12 years and over and adults: 1 g every 6 hours 
or
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) by slow IV injection (3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes). The dose
is expressed in amoxicillin:
Children under 3 months: 30 mg/kg every 12 hours 
Children 3 months and over: 20 to 30 mg/kg every 8 hours (max. 3 g daily)
Adults: 1 g every 8 hours e 
If there is no clinical improvement after 48 hours, consider MRSA: 
clindamycin IV infusion over 30 minutes
Children 1 month and over: 10 mg/kg every 8 hours
Adults: 600 mg every 8 hours f 
Footnotes
(a)The erythema will regress if the treatment is effective. If the erythema spreads consider a treatment failure (MRSA or a
necrotising infection).
(b)Critically ill appearing child: weak grunting or crying, drowsy and difﬁcult to arouse, does not smile, disconjugate or anxious
gaze, pallor or cyanosis, general hypotonia.
(c)For penicillin-allergic patients, clindamycin PO for 7 to 10 days (children: 10 mg/kg 3 times daily; adults: 600 mg 3 times daily).
(d)For penicillin-allergic patients, clindamycin IV infusion (children: 10 mg/kg 3 times daily; adults: 600 mg 3 times daily).
(e)Cloxacillin powder for injection should be reconstituted in 4 ml of water for injection. Then dilute each dose of cloxacillin in
5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or
5% glucose in children 20 kg and over and in adults.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
(f)Dilute each dose of clindamycin in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of
100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children 20 kg and over and in adults.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Cutaneous anthrax
Last updated: September 2022
 
 
Anthrax is caused by the bacterium Bacillus anthracis that primarily affects herbivores (sheep, goats, cows, camels,
horses, etc.). Humans may become infected through contact of broken skin with a dead or sick animal. People at risk
include livestock farmers and those that manipulate skins, wool or carcasses of infected animals.
The disease is found in Eastern Europe, Central Asia, the Mediterranean Basin, Africa and South America.
Pulmonary (acquired by inhalation) and intestinal (acquired by eating infected meat) forms also exist.
Clinical features
Laboratory
Treatment
Uncomplicated cutaneous anthrax 
doxycycline PO (except in pregnant or breastfeeding women)
Children under 45 kg: 2 to 2.2 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily
Children 45 kg and over and adults: 100 mg 2 times daily
clindamycin PO (in patients allergic to ﬁrst-line antibiotics)
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 600 mg) 3 times daily
Adults: 600 mg 3 times daily
orPapule, then pruritic vesicle on uncovered skin surfaces (face, neck, arms, legs). The vesicle ulcerates and becomes
a painless black eschar surrounded by oedema, often associated with with lymphangitis and regional
lymphadenopathy.
The following are criteria of severity:
lesion located on the head or neck, or
presence of systemic symptoms (fever, malaise, headache, tachycardia, tachypnoea, hypotension,
hyper/hypothermia), or
presence of extensive oedema, or
multiple, extensive or bullous lesions.
From vesicular ﬂuid: culture and drug susceptibility testing (rarely available) or Gram stain for microscopic
examination. a 
PCR testing (reference laboratory).
Do not excise the eschar; daily dry dressings.
Antibiotic treatment for 7 to 10 days:
First-line antibiotics:
ciproﬂoxacin PO (including in pregnant or breastfeeding women and children)
Children: 15 mg/kg (max. 500 mg) 2 times daily
Adults: 500 mg 2 times daily
or
Alternatives include:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
amoxicillin PO, if penicillins are effective (documented susceptibility)
Children: 30 mg/kg (max. 1 g) 3 times daily
Adults: 1 g 3 times daily
Severe cutaneous anthrax
Do not mix the two antibiotics in the same infusion bag (incompatibility).
ampicillin IV infusion over 30 minutes
Children 1 month and over: 50 mg/kg (max. 3 g) every 6 hours or 65 mg/kg (max. 4 g) every 8 hours 
Adults: 3 g every 6 hours or 4 g every 8 hours
+ clindamycin IV infusion as above.
Change to oral treatment as soon as possible to complete 14 days of treatment with ciproﬂoxacin + clindamycin or
amoxicillin + clindamycin as for uncomplicated cutaneous anthrax.
Prevention
 Combined antibiotic treatment for 14 days:
 
 
First-line:
ciproﬂoxacin IV infusion over 60 minutes
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 400 mg) every 8 hours 
Adults: 400 mg every 8 hours 
+ clindamycin IV infusion over 30 minutes
Children 1 month and over: 10 to 13 mg/kg (max. 900 mg) every 8 hours
Adults: 900 mg every 8 hours b 
 b 
Alternative, if penicillins are effective (documented susceptibility):
 b 
Intensive care: symptomatic treatment of shock (see Shock, Chapter 1); tracheostomy and ventilatory support may
be necessary.
Antibiotic prophylaxis in case of known skin exposure: treat for 10 days PO as for uncomplicated cutaneous
anthrax.
Livestock vaccination; burial or burning of animal carcasses.
Footnotes
(a)Samples can be stored (including transport time) for 7 days max. in cold chain (if not available, at a temperature < 30 °C).
(b)Dilute each dose of ciproﬂoxacin, clindamycin or ampicillin in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less
than 20 kg and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children 20 kg and above and in adults.
Administer ciproﬂoxacin more slowly than clindamycin or ampicillin.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Endemic treponematoses
 Endemic treponematoses are bacterial infections caused by 3 different types of treponema (other than Treponema
pallidum). Human-to-human transmission may be direct or indirect.
The 3 endemic treponematoses result in positive syphilis serology (TPHA-VDRL), but these tests are not necessary as
diagnosis is clinical. There is no laboratory test that can distinguish between the different treponematoses.
For the diagnosis and treatment of syphilis, see Genital infections, Chapter 9.
Clinical features
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
   Yaws Pinta Bejel
Pathogen Treponema pertenue Treponema carateum Treponema pallidum type M
Geographic
distributionTropical and humid
forestsTropical zones of Latin AmericaArid areas, semi-desert of the Middle
East and Africa
PopulationChildren between 4 and
14 yearsChildren and adults Nomadic populations, particularly
children
First stageYaws chancre: skin
coloured lesion, non-
indurated, itchy, on the
lower limbs in 95% of
cases, with peripheral
adenopathy.
Spontaneous healing or
development of a large
yaw surrounded by
smaller yaws.Annular, erythematous, scaly
plaques, usually on uncovered
body parts (face, extremities),
resemble dermatophytes.
Lesions heal sponta- neously
leaving scars.Discrete chancre: moist papule, most
commonly on the mucous membranes
or in dermal folds, with peripheral
adenopathy.
Second
stageLesions appear 3
weeks after the initial
chancre, occur in crops
and heal spontaneously:
• Frambesioma
(papillomatous lesion,
vegetal, very
contagious)
• Isolated or associated
with yaws (round,
squamous papules, not
very contagious)
• Osteoperiostitis of the
long bones (phalanges,
nasal process of the
maxilla, tibia)Pintids: plaques of various
colours (bluish, reddish, whitish).
May occur anywhere on the
body.• Mucous patches of the mouth
common: very contagious ulcerated,
round in form, indurated, with white
coating, bleed easily, usually occur on
the inside of the lips, cheek and tongue
or labial folds
• Condyloma in the anogenital region
(rare)
• Cutaneous lesions are rare: vegetal
aspect, in dermal folds
• Bone destruction identical to that of
yaws, in the legs and forearms
Late stage After some years of
latency:
• Periostitis; painful,
debilitating osteitis
• Ulcerating and
disﬁguring
rhinopharyngitis
• Juxta-articular nodulesSymmetrical white patches on
the limbs. The depigmentation is
permanent, remaining after
treatment.After several years of latency:
• Gummatous lesions of skin and long
bones
• Plantar and palmar keratosis
• Juxta-articular nodules
• Hyper- and hypo-pigmented patches
(as in pinta)This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment
Yaws
azithromycin PO
Children and adults: 30 mg/kg single dose (max. 2 g)
or, if not available,
benzathine benzylpenicillin IM
Children under 10 years: 1.2 MIU single dose
Children 10 years and over and adults: 2.4 MIU single dose
Pinta and bejel
benzathine benzylpenicillin IM.
As for yaws.
 
For patients allergic to penicillin:
doxycycline PO (except in children under 8 years and pregnant or lactating women)
Children 8 years and over: 50 mg 2 times daily for 14 days
Adults: 100 mg 2 times daily for 14 days
 
Notes:
Treatment of contacts and latent cases
The same treatment should be administered to all symptomatic and asymptomatic contacts and to all latent cases
(asymptomatic individuals with positive serologic test for syphilis) in endemic zones. 
 
References [1] 
 [2] [3] 
Antibiotic treatment will cure early stage cases and may relieve the pain of osteitis. It may be ineffective for late
stage infections.
Syphilis serology will remain positive despite clinical cure.
1.World Health Organization ( 2012) . Yaws: recognition booklet for communities. Reprinted with changes, 2014. 
http://www.who.int/iris/handle/10665/75360 [Accessed 15 May 2018]
2.Oriol Mitjà, David Mabey. Yaws, bejel, and pinta (last updated. May 07, 2018). UpToDate [Accessed 15 May 2018].
3.Michael Marks, Anthony W Solomon, David C Mabey. Endemic treponemal diseases. Transactions of The Royal Society of
Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, Volume 108, Issue 10, 1 October 2014, Pages 601–607.
https://doi.org/10.1093/trstmh/tru128 [Accessed 15 May 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Leprosy
Leprosy is a chronic bacterial infection due to Mycobacterium leprae.
It is transmitted by frequent close contact, mainly between household members.
It mainly affects young adults. 94% of reported cases globally were in Bangladesh, Brazil, Democratic Republic of
Congo, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Madagascar, Myanmar, Nepal, Nigeria, the Philippines, Sri Lanka and the United
Republic of Tanzania.
Clinical features
Leprosy should be considered in any patient presenting with:
 
There are different clinical forms and classiﬁcation systems of leprosy.
Ridley-Jopling classiﬁcation 
This classiﬁcation differentiates 5 forms based on the bacteriological index. These forms correlate with the
immunological response to  M. leprae. Patients with tuberculoid leprosy (TT) are resistant to the bacillus and infection
is localised. Patients with lepromatous leprosy (LL) are extremely sensitive to the bacillus and the infection is
disseminated. Borderline forms (BT, BB, BL) are between the two ends of the spectrum (TT and LL).
 
 
WHO classiﬁcation
In order to simplify diagnosis and to promote rapid implementation of treatment, the WHO has simpliﬁed clinical
classiﬁcation of leprosy and differentiates only 2 forms:
 
Multibacillary leprosy includes LL, BL and BB forms and paucibacillary leprosy includes the TT and BT forms of the
Ridley-Jopling classiﬁcation system.
Laboratory [1]
Hypopigmented or erythematous skin lesion(s) with partial or complete loss of sensation to touch, pain, heat; 
Inﬁltrated pigmented nodules, initially with no sensory loss, on the face, ear lobes and the upper and lower limbs;
Tender, inﬁltrated and hypertrophied peripheral nerve (ulnar, radial, median, popliteal, tibial etc.) with possible
paraesthesia of the extremities, trophic changes (perforating ulcer of the foot) or paralysis (steppage gait,
deformaties of hands and feet, facial nerve paralysis).
Paucibacillary forms 
(least contagious forms)Multibacillary forms 
(most contagious forms)
Tuberculoid Borderline
TuberculoidBorderline Borderline
LepromatousLepromatous
T.T. B.T. B.B. B.L. L.L.
Multibacillary leprosy: more than 5 skin lesions
Paucibacillary leprosy: 1 to 5 skin lesions
Laboratory diagnosis is based on the detection of acid-fast bacilli in a Ziehl-Neelsen stained nasal smear and skin-
split smear taken from the ear lobe or from a skin lesion. In TT leprosy bacilli are not found.
In practice, in most endemic countries diagnosis is based on the WHO clinical classiﬁcation (number of lesions).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment
Countries where leprosy is endemic have a control programme. Check national recommendations.
 
First-line treatment regimens recommended by the WHO
 
 
Note: the monthly doses of rifampicin and clofazimine are administered under direct observation by medical staff
whereas the daily doses of clofazimine and dapsone are taken by the patient at home. Rifampicin should be taken on
an empty stomach to improve absorption.
 
Teach the patient to recognise and quickly report a lepra reaction or relapse in order to modify or restart treatment.
Leprosy reactions
These reactions usually occur during the course of treatment in patients with multibacillary leprosy (BL and LL). They
are associated with the immunological response to M. leprae antigens. Urgent treatment is required to avoid
irreversible disability. Do not interrupt ongoing leprosy treatment. 
Clinical features
 
Treatment AgeMultibacillary leprosy 
(more than 5 skin lesions)Paucibacillary leprosy  
(1 to 5 skin lesions)
Children 10 to 14 yearsrifampicin PO: 450 mg once monthly
+ clofazimine PO: 150 mg once monthly
and 50 mg on alternate days
+ dapsone PO: 50 mg once dailyrifampicin PO: 450 mg once monthly
+ clofazimine PO: 150 mg once monthly
and 50 mg on alternate days
+ dapsone PO: 50 mg once daily
Children 15 years and
over and adultsrifampicin PO: 600 mg once monthly
+ clofazimine PO: 300 mg once monthly
and 50 mg once daily
+ dapsone PO: 100 mg once dailyrifampicin PO: 600 mg once monthly
+ clofazimine PO: 300 mg once monthly
and 50 mg once daily
+ dapsone PO: 100 mg once daily
Duration 12 months 6 months
Reversal reactions: 
Exacerbation of the skin lesions that become erythematous and oedematous and risk or ulceration. Onset or
worsening of numbness of skin lesions; 
Onset of acute painful hypertrophic neuritis.
Erythema nodosum leprosum:
Fever, asthenia, alteration of the general state;
Crops of purplish-red, tender subcutaneous nodules, warmer than the surrounding skin. 
Reversal reactions: 
prednisolone (or prednisone) PO: 0.5 to 1 mg/kg once daily for 2 weeks. Re-examine the patient every 2 weeks
and decrease the dosage if the neurological signs recede. According to clinical response, treatment may last 3 to 6
months.
For example, for an adult:
Week 1 and 2: 40 mg once daily  [2] 
 [3]  This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 
ReferencesWeek 3 and 4: 30 mg once daily 
Week 5 and 6: 20 mg once daily 
Week 7 and 8: 15 mg once daily 
Week 9 and 10: 10 mg once daily 
Week 11 and 12: 5 mg once daily
Erythema nodosum leprosum:
prednisolone (or prednisone) PO as for reversal reactions, for 3 months.  [2] 
Fever: paracetamol PO (see Fever, Chapter 1)
1.World Health Organization. Global Leprosy Programme. Global leprosy strategy 2016-2020. Accelerating towards a leprosy-
free world, 2016.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/208824/9789290225096_en.pdf?sequence=14&isAllowed=y [Accessed 17
October 2018]
2.World Health Organization. WHO Expert Committee on Leprosy. Eighth report. WHO technical report series, n° 968. Geneva,
2012.
http://www.searo.who.int/entity/global_leprosy_p rogramme/publications/8th_expert_comm_2012.pdf [Accessed 17 October
2018]
3.World Health Organization. A guide to eliminating leprosy as a public health problem. Leprosy Elimination Group, 2000.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/66612/WHO_CDS_CPE_CEE_2000.14.pdf?sequence=1 [Accessed 17
October 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Herpes simplex and herpes zoster
 
 
 
 Herpes simplex
Herpes zoster (shingles)
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Herpes simplex
Recurrent viral infection of the skin and mucous membranes due to the Herpes simplex virus. Recurrent lesions have a
different presentation than primary infection.
Clinical features
TreatmentRecurrent herpes labialis: tingling feeling followed by an eruption of vesicles on an erythematous base, located on
the lips (‘fever blisters’) and around the mouth, they may extend onto the face. Recurrence corresponds to a
reactivation of the latent virus after a primary infection. No associated malaise, adenopathy or fever.
Carefully consider other sites: buccal (Stomatitis, Chapter 3), genital (Genital ulcers, Chapter 9), ophthalmic, and
secondary bacterial infections.
Clean with soap and water 2 times daily until the lesions have healed.
For patients with secondary bacterial infections: antibiotic treatment as for impetigo.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Herpes zoster (shingles)
Acute viral infection due to the varicella-zoster virus. Chickenpox is the primary infection and herpes zoster the
reactivation of the latent virus.
Clinical features
TreatmentUnilateral neuralgic pain followed by an eruption of vesicles on a erythematous base, that follow the distribution of a
nerve pathway.
Lesions most commonly occur on the thorax, but herpes zoster may also develop on the face with a risk of
ophthalmic complications.
Herpes zoster is more common in adults than in children.
Similar to that of herpes simplex, with the addition of systematic analgesics: paracetamol PO (see Pain, Chapter 1).
Aciclovir PO given within the ﬁrst 48 hours after the eruption of lesions is only indicated for severe forms: necrotic
or extensive lesions or lesion on the face which may spread to the eyes (see HIV infection and AIDS, Chapter 8).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Other skin disorders
 
 
 
 Eczema
Seborrheic dermatitis
Urticaria
Pellagra
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Eczema
Acute eczema: erythematous plaque, pruritic, vesicular, oozing, with poorly demarcated and crumbly borders.
Chronic eczema: erythematous plaque, scaly, dry, poorly demarcated and pruritic.
Look for a cause (contact allergic dermatitis, fungal or bacterial infection with a distant focus, malnutrition) and ask
about family history.
Treatment
Clean with soap and water 2 times daily.
Then:
for acute eczema: calamine lotion, one application 2 times daily 
for chronic eczema: zinc oxide ointment, one application 2 times daily
Look for and treat any pre-existing condition (scabies, lice etc.).
For patients with secondary infections: treat as impetigo.
For patients with intense pruritus, antihistamines for a few days (see Urticaria).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Seborrheic dermatitis
Seborrheic dermatitis is an inﬂammatory chronic dermatosis that can be localized on areas rich with sebaceous glands.
This dermatosis is more common in infected patients with HIV.
Clinical features
TreatmentErythematous plaques covered by greasy yellow scales that can be localized on the scalp, the face (nose wings,
eyebrows, edge of the eyelids), sternum, spine, perineum, and skin folds.
Clean with soap and water 2 times daily; shampooing the scalp.
Hydrocortisone 1% cream: one application once daily or 2 times daily to the affected area only, in thin layer, for 7
days maximum
Do not apply if pre-existing bacterial infection; treat ﬁrst the infection (see Impetigo).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Urticaria
Last updated: July 2022
 
Papules: transient, erythematous, oedematous, pruritic, resembling nettle stings.
Look for a cause: food or drug (particularly antibiotic) allergy, insect bites; the invasive stage of a bacterial or parasitic
infection (ascariasis, strongylodiasis, ancylostomiasis, schistosomiasis, loiasis), viral infection (hepatitis B or C);
generalised disease (cancer, lupus, dysthyroidism, vasculitis).
Treatment
If the pruritus is intense, antihistamines for a few days:
loratadine PO
Children over 2 years and under 30 kg: 5 mg (5 ml) once daily
Children over 30 kg and adults: 10 mg (1 tab) once daily
In the event of anaphylactic reaction, see Shock (Chapter 1).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Pellagra
Pellagra is a dermatitis resulting from niacin and/or tryptophane deﬁciency (in persons whose staple food is sorghum;
patients with malabsorption, or during famine).
Clinical features
Classically, disease of the ‘three Ds’: dermatitis, diarrhoea and dementia.
Treatment
Children and adults: 100 mg 3 times daily, give with a diet rich in protein until the patient is fully cured.
 
ReferencesDark red plaques, well demarcated, symmetric, located on exposed areas of the body (forehead, neck, forearms,
legs). The skin becomes very scaly, pigmented, sometimes with haemorrhagic bullae.
Gastrointestinal (glossitis, stomatitis and diarrhoea) and neuropsychiatric symptoms are seen in more serious forms.
nicotinamide (vitamin PP) PO [1]
In the event of an epidemic of pellagra, for example in a refugee camp, it is vital that the food ration be modiﬁed
(add groundnuts or dry vegetables) in order to meet the daily requirements (approximately 15 mg daily for adults).
1.World Health Organization, United Nations High Commissions for Refugees. Pellagra and its prevention and control in major
emergencies. World Health Organization, 2000.
http://www.who.int/nutrition/publications/en/pellagra_prevention_control.pdf [Accessed 23 May 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 5: Eye diseases
Xerophthalmia (vitamin A deﬁciency)
Conjunctivitis
Neonatal conjunctivitis
Viral epidemic keratoconjunctivitis
Trachoma
Periorbital and orbital cellulitis
Other pathologies
Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Loiasis
Pterygium
Cataract
 
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Xerophthalmia (vitamin A deﬁciency)
The term xerophthalmia covers all the ocular manifestations of vitamin A deﬁciency. Xerophthalmia can progress to
irreversible blindness if left untreated.
 
In endemic areas, vitamin A deﬁciency and xerophthalmia affect mainly children (particularly those suffering from
malnutrition or measles) and pregnant women.
 
Disorders due to vitamin A deﬁciency can be prevented by the routine administration of retinol.
Clinical features
Treatment
Treat early symptoms to avoid the development of severe complications. Vision can be saved provided that
ulcerations affect less than a third of the cornea and the pupil is spared. Even if deﬁciency has already led to
keratomalacia and irreversible loss of sight, it is imperative to administer treatment, in order to save the other eye and
the life of the patient.
 
retinol (vitamin A) PO:The ﬁrst sign is hemeralopia (crepuscular blindness): the child cannot see in dim light, may bump into objects and/or
show decreased mobility.
Then, other signs appear gradually:
Conjunctival xerosis: bulbar conjunctiva appears dry, dull, thick, wrinkled and insensitive
Bitot’s spots: greyish foamy patches on the bulbar conjunctiva, usually in both eyes (speciﬁc sign, however not
always present)
Corneal xerosis: cornea appears dry and dull
Corneal ulcerations
Keratomalacia (the last and most severe sign of xerophthalmia): softening of the cornea, followed by
perforation of the eyeball and blindness (extreme care must be taken during ophthalmic examination due to risk
of rupturing cornea)
Treatment is the same regardless of the clinical stage, except in pregnant women.
Age 200 000 IU capsule (a)
Children < 6 months (b)50 000 IU (2 drops) once daily on D1, D2 and D8
Children 6 months to < 1 year 100 000 IU (4 drops) once daily on D1, D2 and D8
Children ≥ 1 year and adults 200 000 IU (one capsule) once daily on D1, D2 and D8
(a)Capsules must not be swallowed whole. Cut the end of the capsule and deliver the dose directly into the mouth.
(b)Vitamin A deﬁciency is rare in breastfed infants under 6 months.
In pregnant women, treatment varies according to the stage of illness:
Hemeralopia or Bitot's spots: 10 000 IU once daily or 25 000 IU once weekly for at least 4 weeks. Do not
exceed indicated doses (risk of foetal malformations).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Corneal lesions are a medical emergency. In addition to the immediate administration of retinol, treat or prevent
secondary bacterial infections with 1% tetracycline eye ointment, one application 2 times daily (do not apply eye
drops containing corticosteroids) and protect the eye with an eye-pad after each application.
Prevention
To avoid excessive dosage, record any doses administered on the health/immunisation card and do not exceed
indicated doses. Vitamin A overdose may cause raised intracranial pressure (bulging fontanelle in infants; headache,
nausea, vomiting) and, in severe cases, impaired consciousness and convulsions. These adverse effects are transient;
they require medical surveillance and symptomatic treatment if needed.
 If the cornea is affected, risk of blindness outweighs teratogenic risk. Administer 200 000 IU once daily on D1,
D2 and D8.
Systematically administer retinol PO to children suffering from measles (one dose on D1 and D2).
In areas where vitamin A deﬁciency is endemic, routine supplementation of retinol PO:  a 
Age 200 000 IU capsule (c)
Children < 6 months 50 000 IU (2 drops) single dose
Children 6 months to < 1 year 100 000 IU (4 drops) every 4 to 6 months
Children 1 to < 5 years 200 000 IU (one capsule) every 4 to 6 months
Women after delivery 200 000 IU (one capsule) single dose
(c)Capsules must not be swallowed whole. Cut the end of the capsule and deliver the dose directly into the mouth.
Footnotes
(a)For more information country-speciﬁc prevalence of vitamin A deﬁciency, see:
https://www.thelancet.com/action/showPdf?pii=S2214-109X%2815%2900039-X
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Conjunctivitis
 
 
Conjunctivitis is an acute inﬂammation of the conjunctiva due to a bacterial or viral infection, allergy, or irritation.
Conjunctivitis may be associated with measles or rhinopharyngitis in children.
In the absence of hygiene and effective treatment, secondary bacterial infections may develop, affecting the cornea
(keratitis).
Clinical features
Treatment
Bacterial conjunctivitis
Viral conjunctivitis
Allergic conjunctivitis
 
Note: in the event of a foreign body, check tetanus immunisation status.Neonatal conjunctivitis
Viral epidemic keratoconjunctivitis
Clinical signs of all conjuctivites include: redness of the eye and irritation. Visual acuity is not affected.
Depending on the cause:
abundant and purulent secretions, eyelids stuck together on waking, unilateral infection at onset: bacterial
conjunctivitis;
watery (serous) secretions, no itching: viral conjunctivitis;
excessive lacrimation, eyelid oedema, intense itching: allergic conjunctivitis.
In endemic areas, turn both upper eyelids up to check for signs of trachoma (see Trachoma).
Suspect keratitis if patient reports intense pain (more than is usually associated with conjunctivitis) and
photophobia. Instill one drop of 0.5% ﬂuorescein to check for possible ulcerations.
Always check for foreign bodies (subconjunctival or corneal) and remove after administering 0.4%
oxybuprocaine anaesthetic eye drops. Never give bottle of eye drops to the patient.
Clean eyes 4 times daily with boiled water or 0.9% sodium chloride.
Apply into both eyes 1% tetracycline eye ointment: one application 2 times daily for 7 days
Never use corticosteroid drops or ointment.
Clean eyes 4 times daily with boiled water or 0.9% sodium chloride.
Apply local antibiotics if there is a (risk of) secondary bacterial infection (see above).
Local treatment as for viral conjunctivitis.
Antihistamines PO for one to 3 days (see Urticaria, Chapter 4).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Neonatal conjunctivitis
Conjunctivitis due to Neisseria gonorrhoeae and/or Chlamydia trachomatis in neonates born to mothers with genital
gonococcal and/or chlamydial infections at the time of delivery.
Neonatal conjunctivitis is a medical emergency. Without prompt treatment, risk of corneal lesions and visual
impairment.
Clinical features
Treatment
 
 
If symptoms persist 48 hours after parenteral treatment alone, administer azithromycin PO (or erythromycin PO
as above).
 
Notes:
Prevention
Apply as soon as possible and preferably within one hour after birth:
1% tetracycline eye ointment: application of 1 cm in each eye.
 
ReferencesUnilateral or bilateral purulent conjunctivitis in the ﬁrst 28 days of life.
Clean eyes with isotonic sterile solution (0.9% sodium chloride or Ringer lactate) 4 times daily to remove secretions.
Antibiotic treatment:
for all neonates with conjunctivitis in the ﬁrst 28 days of life
for all neonates born to mothers with a genital infection (purulent cervical discharge) at the time of delivery 
  0 to 7 days 8 to 28 days
First line
 ceftriaxone IM: 50 mg/kg single dose
(max. 125 mg)
 ceftriaxone IM: 50 mg/kg single dose
(max. 125 mg)
+
azithromycin PO: 20 mg/kg once daily for
3 days
Alternatives If ceftriaxone contra-indicated:
cefotaxime IM: 100 mg/kg single doseIf azithromycin unavailable:
erythromycin PO: 12.5 mg/kg 4 times daily for
14 days
When systemic treatment is not immediately available, clean both eyes and apply 1% tetracycline eye
ointment every hour, until systemic treatment is available.
In all cases, treat the genital infection of the mother and partner (see Genital infections, Chapter 9).
Azithromycin and erythromycin are associated with an increased risk of pyloric stenosis in neonates. The risk is
higher with erythromycin . Adverse effects should be monitored.  [1] [2] [3] 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
1.Lund M et al. Use of macrolides in mother and child and risk of infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis: nationwide cohort
study. BMJ. 2014; 348: g1908.
https://www.bmj.com/content/348/bmj.g1908 [Accessed 16 April 2021]
2.Murchison L et al. Post-natal erythromycin exposure and risk of infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis: a systematic review
and meta-analysis. Pediatr Surg Int. 2016 Dec; 32(12): 1147-1152. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5106491/ [Accessed 16 April 2021]
3.Almaramhy HH et al. The association of prenatal and postnatal macrolide exposure with subsequent development of
infantile hypertrophic pyloric stenosis: a systematic review and meta-analysis. Ital J Pediatr. 2019 Feb 4; 45(1)20. 
https://ijponline.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13052-019-0613-2 [Accessed 16 April 2021]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Viral epidemic keratoconjunctivitis
 
Corneal and conjunctival lesions
 
Treat as viral conjunctivitis. If possible, refer to an ophthalmologist.
Protect the eye with a compress as long as photophobia lasts. Remove as soon as possible.
If necessary, administer a preventive dose of vitamin A.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Trachoma
Trachoma is a highly contagious keratoconjunctivitis due to Chlamydia trachomatis. The disease is endemic in the
poorest rural areas of Africa, Asia, Central and South America and the Middle East.
Infection is usually ﬁrst contracted early in childhood by direct or indirect contact (dirty hands, contaminated towels,
ﬂies). In the absence of hygiene and effective treatment, the inﬂammation intensiﬁes with successive infections,
causing scars and deformities on the upper tarsal conjunctiva. The resulting ingrowing eyelashes (trichiasis) cause
corneal lesions followed by permanent blindness, usually in adulthood.
The WHO classiﬁes trachoma into 5 stages. Early diagnosis and treatment of ﬁrst stages is essential to avoid the
development of trichiasis and associated complications.
Clinical features
Several stages can occur simultaneously :
 
 
 
 
 
Treatment
 
  [1] [2] 
Stage 1: trachomatous inﬂammation - follicular (TF)
Presence of ﬁve or more follicles in the upper tarsal conjunctiva. Follicles are whitish, grey or yellow elevations,
paler than the surrounding conjunctiva.
Stage 2: trachomatous inﬂammation - intense (TI)
The upper tarsal conjunctiva is red, rough and thickened. The blood vessels, normally visible, are masked by a
diffuse inﬂammatory inﬁltration or follicles.
Stage 3: trachomatous scarring (TS)
Follicles disappear, leaving scars: scars are white lines, bands or patches in the tarsal conjunctiva.
Stage 4: trachomatous trichiasis (TT)
Due to multiple scars the margin of the eyelid, usually the upper lid, turns inwards (entropion); the eyelashes rub
against the cornea and cause ulcerations and chronic inﬂammation.
Stage 5: corneal opacity (CO)
Cornea gradually loses its transparency, leading to visual impairment and blindness.
Stages 1 and 2:
Clean eyes and face several times per day.
Antibiotic treatment:
The treatment of choice is azithromycin PO:
Children: 20 mg/kg single dose
Adults: 1 g single dose
Failing the above, 1% tetracycline eye ointment: one application 2 times daily for 6 weeks, or, as a last resort,
erythromycin PO: 20 mg/kg (max. 1 g) 2 times daily for 14 days. [3] 
Stage 3: no treatment
Stage 4: surgical treatment
While waiting for surgery, if regular patient follow-up is possible, taping eyelashes to the eyelid is a palliative
measure that can help protect the cornea. In certain cases, this may lead to permanent correction of the trichiasis
within a few months.
The method consists in sticking the ingrowing eyelashes to the external eyelid with a thin strip of sticking-plaster,
making sure that the eyelid can open and close perfectly. Replace the plaster when it starts to peel off (usually once
a week); continue treatment for 3 months.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Prevention
Cleaning of the eyes, face and hands with clean water reduces direct transmission and the development of secondary
bacterial infections.
 
ReferencesNote: epilation of ingrowing eyelashes is not recommended since it offers only temporary relief and regrowing
eyelashes are more abrasive to the cornea.
Stage 5: no treatment
1.Solomon AW et al. The simpliﬁed trachoma grading system, amended. Bull World Health Organ. 2020;98(10):698-705. 
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC7652564/ [Accessed 20 April 2021]
2.Thylefors B et al. A simple system for the assessment of trachoma and its complications. Bull World Health Organ.
1987;65(4):477–83.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC2491032/ [Accessed 20 April 2021]
3.Evans JR et al. Antibiotics for trachoma. Cochrane Database Syst Rev. 2019 Sep 26;9:CD001860. 
https://www.cochranelibrary.com/cdsr/doi/10.1002/14651858.CD001860.pub4/full [Accessed 20 April 2021]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Periorbital and orbital cellulitis
Periorbital cellulitis is a common, usually benign, bacterial infection of the eyelids. It arises principally following trauma
to the eyelids (insect bite or abrasion).
Orbital cellulitis is a serious infection involving the contents of the orbit (fat and ocular muscles) that may lead to loss of
vision or a brain abscess. It usually arises secondary to spread from sinusitis (e.g. as a complication of ethmoid
sinusitis).
Periorbital and orbital cellulitis are more common in children than in adults.
The most common organisms causing periorbital and orbital cellulitis are Staphylococcus aureus, Streptococcus
pneumoniae and other streptococci, as well as Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type b (Hib) in children living in countries where
rates of immunisation with Hib remain low.
Clinical features
Treatment
 
 Signs common to both periorbital and orbital cellulitis: acute eyelid erythema and oedema; the oedema has a
violaceous hue if secondary to H. inﬂuenzae.
In case of orbital cellulitis only:
Pain with eye movements;
Ophthalmoplegia (paralysis of eye movements) often with diplopia (double vision);
Protrusion of the eye (eye bulges out of the socket);
High fever, systemic signs.
Hospitalize for the following: orbital cellulitis, children younger than 3 months, critically ill appearing patient, local
complications, debilitated patient (chronic conditions, the elderly), if there is a risk of non-compliance with or failure
of outpatient treatment. Treat the other patients as outpatients. a 
Outpatient antibiotic therapy:
cefalexin PO for 7 to 10 days
Neonates 0 to 7 days: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily 
Neonates 8 days to 1 month: 25 mg/kg 3 times daily 
Children over 1 month: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily (max. 2 g daily)
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 1 g 2 times daily
or
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO for 7 to 10 days
Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1 exclusively. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults:
Ratio 8:1: 3000 mg daily (2 tab of 500/62.5 mg 3 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 2625 mg daily (1 tab of 875/125 mg 3 times daily) b 
Inpatient antibiotic therapy:
ceftriaxone slow IV(3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes; 60 minutes in neonates) for at least 5 days
Children: one dose of 100 mg/kg on the ﬁrst day, then 50 mg/kg 2 times daily
Adults: 1 to 2 g once daily
+
cloxacillin IV infusion (60 minutes)
Neonates 0 to 7 days (< 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 12 hours c 
 d 
 e This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
If there is no improvement in the ﬁrst 48 hours (suspicion of methicillin resistant S. aureus), replace cloxacillin with:
clindamycin IV infusion (30 minutes)
Neonates 0 to 7 days (< 2 kg): 5 mg/kg every 12 hours
Neonates 0 to 7 days (≥ 2 kg): 5 mg/kg every 8 hours
Neonates 8 days to < 1 month (< 2 kg): 5 mg/kg every 8 hours
Neonates 8 days to < 1 month (≥ 2 kg): 10 mg/kg every 8 hours
Children 1 month and over: 10 mg/kg every 8 hours (max. 1800 mg daily)
Adults: 600 mg every 8 hours
After 5 days, change to clindamycin PO at the same doses to complete 7 to 10 days of treatment.
 
 Neonates 0 to 7 days (≥ 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
Neonates 8 days to < 1 month (< 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
Neonates 8 days to < 1 month (≥ 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
Children 1 month and over: 25 to 50 mg/kg every 6 hours (max. 8 g daily)
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 2 g every 6 hours
If there is clinical improvement (patient afebrile and erythema and oedema have improved) after 5 days, change to
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO at the doses indicated above to complete 7 to 10 days of treatment.
 f 
If orbital cellulitis is unresponsive to IV antibiotics, consider an abscess. Transfer patient to a surgical centre for
drainage.
Footnotes
(a)Critically ill appearing child: weak grunting or crying, drowsy and difﬁcult to arrouse, does not smile, disconjugate or anxious
gaze, pallor or cyanosis, general hypotonia.
(b)For penicillin-allergic patients, clindamycin PO for 7 to 10 days:
Children: 10 mg/kg 3 times daily; adults: 600 mg 3 times daily
(c)For penicillin-allergic patients, clindamycin IV infusion (doses as above).
(d)For administration by IV route, ceftriaxone powder should to be reconstituted in water for injection only. For administration
by IV infusion, dilute each dose of ceftriaxone in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg
and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children over 20 kg and in adults.
(e)Cloxacillin powder for injection should be reconstituted in 4 ml of water for injection. Then dilute each dose of cloxacillin in
5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5 % glucose in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or
5% glucose in children over 20 kg and in adults.
(f)Dilute each dose of clindamycin in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of
100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children over 20 kg and in adults.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Other pathologies
 
 
 
 
 Onchocerciasis
Loiasis
Pterygium
Cataract
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Ocular lesions result from the invasion of the eye by microﬁlariae. They generally develop in adults and progress to
blindness in the absence of early treatment.
Clinical features and treatment
Ocular lesions are always associated with onchocercal skin lesions (see Onchocerciasis, Chapter 6).
 
For treatment, see Onchocerciasis, Chapter 6. Ivermectin treatment may improve anterior segment lesions (sclerosing
keratitis, iridocyclitis) and visual acuity. Severe lesions (chorioretinal lesions, optic atrophy) continue to progress despite
treatment.Pruritus, hemeralopia (crepuscular blindness), decrease in visual acuity, narrowing of the visual ﬁeld, awareness of
microﬁlariae in the visual ﬁeld (the patient sees “little wiggling worms before his eyes”).
Lesions of the cornea (punctuate, then sclerosing, keratitis), iris (iridocyclitis) or posterior segment
(chorioretinopathy and optic atrophy); microﬁlariae within the anterior chamber or vitreous humor (slit lamp).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Loiasis
Clinical features and treatment
Migration of an adult worm under the palpebral or bulbar conjunctiva (white, ﬁliform worm, measuring 4 to 7 cm in
length, mobile) and ocular pruritus, lacrimation, photophobia or eyelid oedema.
 
For treatment, see Loiais, Chapter 6. The migration of the worm is often of very brief duration. Do not attempt to
extract it, or administer anaesthetic drops; simply reassure the patient, the event is harmless. Surgical removal is
likewise futile if the worm is dead/calciﬁed.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Pterygium
A whitish, triangular growth of ﬁbrovascular tissue extending slowly from the conjunctiva to the cornea. It occurs most
frequently in patients who are exposed to wind, dust, or arid climates and never disappears spontaneously.
Clinical features and treatment
Two stages:
Benign pterygium develops slowly, does not reach the pupil: no treatment.
Progressive vascularized pterygium: red and inﬂamed growth covers the pupil and may impair vision:
Clean eye with sterile water or 0.9% sodium chloride.
Surgical removal if facilities are available.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Cataract
 
 
Opacity of the lens that causes a progressive loss of visual acuity. Cataract is common in the tropics and can occur at
a younger age than in Europe. The presence of cataract in both eyes leads to blindness. Surgery is the only treatment.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 6: Parasitic diseases
Malaria
Human African trypanosomiasis (sleeping sickness)
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease)
Leishmaniases
Intestinal protozoan infections (parasitic diarrhoea)
Flukes
Schistosomiases
Cestodes
Nematode infections
Filariasis
Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Loiasis
Lymphatic ﬁlariasis (LF)
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Malaria
Malaria is a parasitic infection due to protozoa of the genus Plasmodium, transmitted to humans by the bite of
Anopheles mosquitoes. Transmission by transfusion of parasite infected blood and transplacental transmission are
also possible.
5 species of Plasmodium cause malaria in humans: P. falciparum, P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae and P. knowlesi. All
species may cause uncomplicated malaria. Severe malaria (deﬁned by the presence of complications) is almost always
due to P. falciparum. and, less frequently, P. vivax and P. knowlesi.
Uncomplicated malaria can rapidly progress to severe malaria, and severe malaria may cause death within a few hours
if left untreated.
Clinical features
Malaria should always be considered in patients living in or coming from, an endemic area, who presents with fever (or
history of fever in the previous 48 hours). 
Uncomplicated malaria
Fever is frequently associated with chills, sweating, headache, muscular ache, malaise, anorexia or nausea. In children,
fever may be associated with abdominal pain, diarrhoea and vomiting. Mild to moderate anaemia is frequent in children
and pregnant women.
Severe malaria
In addition to the above, patients presenting with one or more of the following complications should be hospitalised
immediately:
Laboratory
Parasitological diagnosis
Diagnosis of malaria should be conﬁrmed, whenever possible. If testing is not available, treatment of suspected malaria
should not be delayed. 
 
Rapid diagnostic tests (RDTs)
Rapid tests detect parasite antigens. They give only a qualitative result (positive or negative) and may remain positive
several days or weeks following elimination of parasites.
  [1] 
Impaired consciousness, including coma.
Seizures: more than 2 episodes of generalised or focal (e.g. abnormal eye movements) seizures within 24 hours.
Prostration: extreme weakness; in children: inability to sit or drink/suck.
Respiratory distress: rapid, laboured breathing or slow, deep breathing.
Shock: cold extremities, weak or absent pulse, capillary reﬁll time ≥ 3 seconds, cyanosis.
Jaundice: yellow discolouration of mucosal surfaces of the mouth, conjunctivae and palms.
Haemoglobinuria: dark red urine.
Abnormal bleeding: skin (petechiae), conjunctivae, nose, gums; blood in stools.
Acute renal failure: oliguria (urine output < 12 ml/kg/day in children and < 400 ml/day in adults) despite adequate
hydration.
 [2]
 a This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Microscopy
Thin and thick blood ﬁlms enable parasite detection, species identiﬁcation, quantiﬁcation and monitoring of
parasitaemia.
Blood ﬁlms may be negative due to sequestration of the parasitized erythrocytes in peripheral capillaries in severe
malaria, as well as in placental vessels in pregnant women.
 
Note: even with positive diagnostic results, rule out other causes of fever.
Additional examinations
Haemoglobin (Hb) level
To be measured routinely in all patients with clinical anaemia, and in all patients with severe malaria.
 
Blood glucose level
To be measured routinely to detect hypoglycaemia in patients with severe malaria and those with malnutrition (see
Hypoglycaemia, Chapter 1).
Treatment of malaria due to P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, P. knowlesi
chloroquine (CQ) PO
Children and adults:
Day 1: 10 mg base/kg
Day 2: 10 mg base/kg 
Day 3: 5 mg base/kg
 
In general P. vivax remains sensitive to CQ but resistance is found in several countries. Where such resistance is high
(>10%), or in countries which have de-registered CQ due to P. falciparum resistance, an artemisinin-based combination
therapy (ACT) should be used instead. For dosing information, see Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria.
 
Relapses can occur with P. vivax and P. ovale due to activation of dormant parasites in the liver. Primaquine PO for 14
days (0.25 to 0.5 mg/kg once daily in children ≥ 15 kg; 15 mg once daily in adults) can be given to eliminate these
parasites, after the initial treatment with CQ or an ACT. However, this treatment is only recommended for patients living
in areas where reinfection is unlikely, i.e. non-endemic, low transmission areas or in countries aiming for elimination of
malaria. This treatment is contra-indicated in individuals with G6PD deﬁciency. If G6PD deﬁciency cannot be tested
individually, the decision to prescribe primaquine must take into account the prevalence of deﬁciency in the population.
Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria
Antimalarial treatment
During pregnancy, see Antimalarial treatment in pregnant women.
 
Treatment is an artemisinin-based combination therapy (ACT)given by the oral route for 3 days . The ﬁrst-line ACT
is chosen according to therapeutic efﬁcacy in the area where the patient is living. If the ﬁrst line ACT is unavailable,
contra-indicated or has failed despite being correctly administered, use another ACT. For dosing information, see table
below.
  b 
 c  [1] 
 c   [1] 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria
In low malaria endemic areas, in addition to ACT, all individuals (except in children < 30 kg,  pregnant women or
breastfeeding women of infants aged < 6 months) diagnosed with P. falciparum malaria, should be given a single dose
of 0.25 mg/kg primaquine to reduce the risk of transmission.
 
Notes:
 
Quinine PO is not recommended as standard treatment, however still remains in some national protocols:
quinine PO for 7 days
Children and adults under 50 kg: 10 mg/kg 3 times daily
Adults 50 kg and over: 600 mg 3 times daily
Symptomatic treatment
Paracetamol PO in the event of high fever only (Fever, Chapter 1).
Treatment of severe malaria
The patient must be hospitalised.
Antimalarial treatment b 
 [3] 
In infants below the age/weight mentioned in the table above, there is little data on efﬁcacy and safety of ACTs.
The combinations AL, AS/AQ and DHA/PPQ can be used. The dose should be calculated so as to correspond to
10-16 mg/kg/dose of lumefantrine; 10 mg/kg daily of amodiaquine; 20 mg/kg daily of piperaquine.
Clinical condition of young children can deteriorate rapidly; it may be preferable to start parenteral treatment
straight away (see below).
 b 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
During pregnancy, see Antimalarial treatment in pregnant women.
Pre-referral treatment
If the patient needs to be transferred, administer before transfer:
or
 
In either case, provide patients, especially children, with some sugar prior to or during transfer.
Inpatient treatment
The drug of choice is artesunate, preferably IV, or if not possible IM.
For patients in shock: IM route is not appropriate, use artesunate IV only. 
 
artesunate slow IV injection (3 to 5 minutes) or, if not possible, slow IM injection, into the anterior thigh:
Children under 20 kg: 3 mg/kg/dose
Children 20 kg and over and adults: 2.4 mg/kg/dose
Treat parenterally for at least 24 hours (3 doses), then, if the patient can tolerate the oral route, change to a complete
3-day course of an ACT. If not, continue parenteral treatment once daily until the patient can change to oral route
(without exceeding 7 days of parenteral treatment).
 
If artesunate is not unavailable, artemether may be an alternative: 
artemether IM into the anterior thigh (never administer by IV route)
Children and adults: 3.2 mg/kg on admission (D1) then 1.6 mg/kg once daily
Treat parenterally for at least 24 hours (2 doses), then, if the patient can tolerate the oral route, change to a complete
3-day course of an ACT. If not, continue parenteral treatment once daily until the patient can change to oral route
(without exceeding 7 days of parenteral treatment).
 
Note: if patient is still on parenteral treatment on Day 5, continue on the same treatment until Day 7. In this case it is
not necessary to start an ACT.
 
Quinine IV is still recommended in some national protocols. It may be used in treatment of malaria with shock if
artesunate IV is not available. The dose is expressed in quinine salt:
For adults, administer each dose of quinine in 250 ml of glucose. For children under 20 kg, administer each dose of
quinine in a volume of 10 ml/kg of glucose.
Do not administer a loading dose to patients who have received oral quinine, or meﬂoquine within the previous 24
hours: start with maintenance dose.
Treat parenterally for at least 24 hours, then, if the patient can tolerate the oral route, change to a complete 3-day
course of an ACT (or if not available, oral quinine to complete 7 days of quinine treatment). If not, continue parenteral
treatment until the patient can change to oral route (without exceeding 7 days of parenteral treatment).At community level, for children under 6 years: one dose of rectal artesunate (10 mg/kg)  d 
Children 2 months to < 3 years (≤ 10 kg): 1 rectal capsule (100 mg)
Children 3 to < 6 years (≤ 20 kg): 2 rectal capsules (200 mg)
At dispensary level, for children and adults: the ﬁrst dose of artesunate or, if unavailable, the ﬁrst dose of
artemether. For dosing information, see below.
One dose on admission (H0)
One dose 12 hours after admission (H12)
One dose 24 hours after admission (H24)
Then one dose once daily
Loading dose: 20 mg/kg to be administered over 4 hours, then, keep the vein open with an infusion of 5% glucose
over 4 hours; then
Maintenance dose: 8 hours after the start of the loading dose, 10 mg/kg every 8 hours (alternate quinine over 4
hours and 5% glucose over 4 hours).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Symptomatic treatment and management of complications
Hydration
Maintain adequate hydration. As a guide, for volume to be administered per 24 hours by oral or IV route, see Appendix
1.
Adjust the volume according to clinical condition in order to avoid dehydration or ﬂuid overload (risk of pulmonary
oedema).
Fever
Paracetamol in the event of high fever only (Fever, Chapter 1).
Severe anaemia
For treatment, see Anaemia, Chapter 1.
Hypoglycaemia
For treatment, see Hypoglycaemia, Chapter 1.
 
Notes: 
Coma
Check/ensure the airway is clear, measure blood glucose level and assess level of consciousness.
In the event of hypoglycaemia or if blood glucose level cannot be measured, administer glucose.
If the patient does not respond to administration of glucose, or if hypoglycaemia is not detected:
Seizures
See Seizures, Chapter 1. Address possible causes (e.g. hypoglycaemia; fever in children).
Respiratory distress
 
Oliguria and acute renal failureIn an unconscious or prostrated patient, in case of emergency or when venous access is unavailable or awaited, use
granulated sugar by the sublingual route to correct hypoglycaemia. e 
The risk of hypoglycaemia is higher in patients receiving IV quinine. 
Insert a urinary catheter; place the patient in the recovery position.
Monitor vital signs, blood glucose level, level of consciousness, ﬂuid balance (urine output and ﬂuid input) hourly until
stable, then every 4 hours.
Rule out meningitis (lumbar puncture) or proceed directly to administration of an antibiotic (see Meningitis, Chapter
7).
Reposition the patient every 2 hours; ensure eyes and mouth are kept clean and moist, etc.
Rapid laboured breathing:
Check for pulmonary oedema (crepitations on auscultation), which may occur with or without ﬂuid overload: reduce
IV infusion rate if the patient is receiving IV therapy, nurse semi-sitting, oxygen, furosemide IV: 1 mg/kg in children,
40 mg in adults. Repeat after 1 to 2 hours if necessary.
Associated pneumonia should also be considered (see Acute pneumonia, Chapter 2).
Slow, deep breathing (suspected metabolic acidosis):
Look for dehydration (and correct if present), decompensated anaemia (and transfuse if present).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Look ﬁrst for dehydration (Dehydration, Chapter 1), especially due to inadequate ﬂuid intake or excessive ﬂuid losses
(high fever, vomiting, diarrhoea). Treat dehydration if present. Be aware of the risk of ﬂuid overload and acute
pulmonary oedema. Monitor for the return of urine output.
 
Acute renal failure (ARF) is found almost exclusively in adults and is more common in Asia than Africa. Insert a urinary
catheter, measure output. Restrict ﬂuids to 1 litre/day (30 ml/kg/day in children), plus additional volume equal to urine
output. Renal dialysis is often necessary.
Antimalarial treatment in pregnant women
Uncomplicated P. vivax, P. ovale, P. malariae, P. knowlesi malaria
As other patients.
Primaquine should not be given in pregnancy.
Uncomplicated falciparum malaria
All ACT included in the table Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria can be used in all trimesters.
If ACTs are not available, quinine PO (for dosing, see Treatment of uncomplicated falciparum malaria)
combined with clindamycin PO if possible (10 mg/kg 2 times daily for 7 days) may be an alternative to ACT.
Primaquine should not be given in pregnancy.
Severe malaria
Artesunate, or if unavailable artemether, is recommended in all trimesters.
Quinine IV is not recommended as standard treatment, however it still remains in some national protocols.
Prevention
 For pregnant women in areas with high risk of infection with P. falciparum, refer to the guide Essential obstetric and
newborn care, MSF.
In areas with seasonal malaria transmission (in particular across the Sahel sub-region), seasonal malaria
chemoprevention in children < 5 years reduces mortality: administer amodiaquine + SP at monthly intervals for 4
months during the transmission period. [4] 
In malaria endemic areas and in epidemic-prone contexts, all in-patient facilities (including HIV treatment centres
and feeding centres), should be furnished with long-lasting insecticidal nets (LLINs). For more information, refer to
the guide Public health engineering, MSF.
See specialised literature for information regarding anti-vector measures and prevention in travellers.
Footnotes
(a)Most rapid tests detect the following antigens alone or in combination: HRP2 protein speciﬁc to P. falciparum; an enzyme
(Pf pLDH) speciﬁc to P. falciparum; an enzyme (pan pLDH) common to all 4 plasmodium species. HRP2 may continue to be
detectable for 6 weeks or more after parasite clearance; pLDH remains detectable for several days (up to 2 weeks) after
parasite clearance.
Use pan pLDH tests as ﬁrst choice in hyper and holo-endemic areas, as well as in areas of intense seasonal transmission and
during outbreaks or complex emergencies. In other contexts, HRP2 tests (P. falciparum > 95%) or HRP2 + pLDH combination
tests (P. falciparum < 95%) are preferred.
(b)If the patient vomits within 30 minutes after administration: re-administer the full dose. If the patient vomits between 30
minutes and 1 hour after administration, re-administer half of the dose. If severe vomiting precludes oral therapy, manage as
severe malaria, see Treatment of severe malaria.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
References(c)ACT: a combination of artemisinin or one of its derivatives (e.g. artesunate, artemether) with another antimalarial of a
different class.
(d)If it is impossible to refer a patient to a center capable of providing parenteral treatment, rectal artesunate should be given
according to the same schedule as artesunate slow IV injection (H0, H12, H24, then once daily).
(e)Place a level teaspoon of sugar, moistened with a few drops of water, under the tongue, then place the patient in the
recovery position. Repeat after 15 minutes if the patient has not regained consciousness. As with other methods for
treating hypoglycaemia, maintain regular sugar intake, and monitor.
1.World Health Organization. Guidelines for the treatment of malaria, 3rd ed. World Health Organization. 2015.
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/162441
2.World Health Organization. Compendium of WHO malaria guidance: prevention, diagnosis, treatment, surveillance and
elimination. 2019.
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/312082
3.World Health Organization. WHO policy brief on single-dose primaquine as gametocytocide in Plasmodium falciparum
malaria. 2015.
https://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/who_htm_gmp_2015.1.pdf?ua=1
4.World Health Organization. WHO Policy Recommendation: Seasonal Malaria Chemoprevention (SMC) for Plasmodium
falciparum malaria control in highly seasonal transmission areas of the Sahel sub-region in Africa. 2012.
https://www.who.int/malaria/publications/atoz/smc_policy_recommendation_en_032012.pdf?ua=1
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Human African trypanosomiasis (sleeping
sickness)
Human African trypanosomiasis (HAT) is a zoonosis caused by protozoa (trypanosomes), transmitted to humans
through the bite of a tsetse ﬂy (Glossina). Transmission by contaminated blood transfusion and transplacental
transmission are also possible.
The disease is found only in sub-Saharan Africa. There are two forms: Trypanosoma brucei gambiense HAT in western
and central Africa and Trypanosoma brucei rhodesiense HAT in eastern and southern Africa.
Clinical features
Inoculation may be followed by an immediate local reaction (trypanosomal chancre). This chancre arises in about 50%
of all rhodesiense but rarely in gambiense.
Gambiense HAT
Rhodesiense HAT
The ﬁrst stage is the same as above, but the incubation period is shorter (< 3 weeks), the disease evolves more rapidly
and symptoms are more severe. Patients often die of myocarditis in 3 to 6 months without having developed signs of
the meningo-encephalitic stage.
In practice, gambiense and rhodesiense HAT can be difﬁcult to differentiate: e.g., there exist cases of acute
gambiense infection and others of chronic rhodesiense infection.
LaboratoryIncubation lasts from a few days to several years.
The ﬁrst stage (haemolymphatic stage) corresponds to the haematogenous and lymphatic dissemination of the
parasite. Signs include intermittent fever, joint pain, lymphadenopathy (ﬁrm, mobile, painless lymph nodes, mainly
cervical), hepatosplenomegaly and skin signs (facial oedema, pruritus).
The second stage (meningoencephalitic stage) corresponds to the invasion of the central nervous system. Signs of
the haemolymphatic stage recede or disappear and varying neurological signs progressively develop: sensory
disturbances (deep hyperaesthesia), psychiatric disorders (apathy or agitation), disturbance of the sleep cycle (with
daytime somnolence alternating with insomnia at night), impaired motor functions (paralysis, seizures, tics) and
neuroendocrine disorders (amenorrhoea, impotence).
In the absence of treatment: cachexia, lethargy, coma and death.
Diagnosis involves 3 steps for gambiense HAT (screening test, diagnostic conﬁrmation and stage determination)
and 2 steps for rhodesiense HAT (diagnostic conﬁrmation and stage determination).
The recommended screening test for T.b. gambiense infection is the CATT (Card Agglutination Test for
Trypanosomiasis). It detects the presence of speciﬁc antibodies in the patient’s blood or serum.
Diagnostic conﬁrmation: presence of trypanosomes in lymph node aspirates or in blood using concentration
techniques: capillary tube centrifugation technique (Woo test), quantitative buffy coat (QBC), mini-anion exchange
centrifugation technique (mAEC).
Stage determination: detection of trypanosomes (after centrifugation) and white cell count in the cerebrospinal ﬂuid
(lumbar puncture):
Haemolymphatic stage: no trypanosomes AND ≤ 5 white cells/mm3This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment (except in pregnant women)
Haemolymphatic stage (Stage I)
Gambiense HAT
pentamidine isetionate deep IM
Children and adults: 4 mg/kg once daily for 7 to 10 days
Patients should receive a source of glucose (meal, sweet tea) one hour before injection (risk of hypoglycaemia); they
should remain supine during administration and one hour after injection (risk of hypotension).
Rhodesiense HAT
suramin slow IV
Children and adults:
D1: test dose of 4 to 5 mg/kg
D3, D10, D17, D24, D31: 20 mg/kg (max. 1 g per injection)
Suramin may cause anaphylactic reactions, a test dose is recommended prior to starting treatment. In the event of an
anaphylactic reaction after the test dose, the patients must not be given suramin again.
Meningoencephalitic stage (Stage II)
Before administrating trypanocides, the priority is to improve the patient’s general condition (rehydration, treatment of
malaria, intestinal worms, malnutrition, bacterial infections). It is nonetheless recommended not to postpone the
trypanocidal treatment for more than 10 days.
Gambiense HAT
 Meningoencephalitic stage: evidence of trypanosomes OR > 5 white cells/mm3
Due to the toxicity of trypanocides, detection of the parasite is essential before initiating treatment. In the absence
of parasitological conﬁrmation, treatment may nevertheless be justiﬁed in certain cases: very strong clinical
suspicion, patients in life-threatening condition, strong serological suspicion (CATT 1:16 positive) in a population
where the disease is highly prevalent (> 2%).
Several treatment regimens exist. Check national recommendations and local resistance levels.
Treatment must be administered under close medical supervision. Patients receiving pentamidine can be treated as
outpatients but those receiving suramin, eﬂornithine (with or without nifurtimox) or melarsoprol should be
hospitalised.
After treatment, patients should be checked every 6 months (clinical examination, lumbar puncture and examination
for trypanosomes) over 24 months, to look for relapse.
First choice: nifurtimox-eﬂornithine combination therapy (NECT)
nifurtimox PO
Children and adults: 5 mg/kg 3 times daily for 10 days
+ eﬂornithine IV infusion over 2 hours
Children and adults: 200 mg/kg every 12 hours for 7 days
The catheter must be handled with great attention to avoid local or general bacterial infections: thoroughly disinfect
the insertion site, ensure secure catheter ﬁxation, protect the insertion site with a sterile dressing, systematically
change the catheter every 48 hours or earlier in case of signs of phlebitis.
Second choice:
eﬂornithine IV infusion over 2 hoursThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Rhodesiense HAT
melarsoprol slow IV
Children and adults: 2.2 mg/kg once daily for 10 days
Prednisolone PO (1 mg/kg once daily) is frequently combined throughout the duration of treatment.
Treatment in pregnant women
All trypanocides are potentially toxic for the mother and the foetus (risk of miscarriage, malformation, etc.). However,
due to the life-threatening risk for the mother and the risk of mother-to-child transmission, treatment must be initiated
as follows:
 
 
Prevention and controlChildren under 12 years: 150 mg/kg every 6 hours for 14 days
Children 12 years and over and adults: 100 mg/kg every 6 hours for 14 days
In the event of a relapse after NECT or eﬂornithine:
melarsoprol slow IV
Children and adults: 2.2 mg/kg once daily for 10 days
Melarsoprol is highly toxic: reactive encephalopathy (coma, or recurrent or prolonged seizures) in 5 to 10% of
treated patients, fatal in around 50% of cases; peripheral neuropathy, invasive diarrhoea, severe skin rash, phlebitis,
etc.
Prednisolone PO (1 mg/kg once daily) is frequently combined throughout the duration of treatment.
Haemolymphatic stage:
pentamidine for gambiense HAT as of the second trimester and suramin for rhodesiense HAT.
Meningoencephalitic stage: treatment depends on the mother's condition:
If in immediately life-threatening condition: treatment with NECT or eﬂornithine cannot be deferred until after
delivery.
If not immediately life-threatening condition: pentamidine for gambiense HAT and suramin for rhodesiense HAT.
Treatment with NECT or eﬂornithine is to be administered after delivery.
Individual protection against tsetse ﬂy bites: long sleeves and trousers, repellents, keeping away from risk areas
(e.g. near rivers).
Disease control: mass screening and treatment of patients (T.b. gambiense), trypanocide treatment of cattle (T.b.
rhodesiense), vector control using tsetse ﬂy traps or insecticides.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
American trypanosomiasis (Chagas disease)
Chagas disease is a zoonosis caused by the protozoa Trypanosoma cruzi. It is transmitted to humans by contact of
triatomine bug faeces with a break in the skin (often caused by a bite from the triatomine bug), or with mucous
membranes. Transmission by contaminated blood transfusion, accidental exposure to blood, mother-to-child (during
pregnancy or childbirth) or consumption of contaminated food and water is also possible. 
Chagas disease has two phases: an acute phase, which lasts approximately 4 to 6 weeks, and a chronic phase, which
is lifelong if left untreated.
The disease is primarily found on the American continent. It is signiﬁcantly underdiagnosed.
Clinical features
Acute phase
Chronic phase
Diagnosis
Laboratory
Other investigations
Treatment a  [1]
Most cases are asymptomatic.
If transmitted through a break in the skin: a red swelling on the skin (chagoma) or unilateral painless purplish
periorbital oedema (Romaña's sign) with local lymphadenopathy, headache and fever.
Rarely: multiple lymphadenopathies, hepatosplenomegaly, myocarditis (chest pain, dyspnoea), meningoencephalitis
(seizures, paralysis).
Many cases remain asymptomatic (indeterminate phase).
Up to 30% of cases develop organ damage: [2]
cardiac lesions (conduction disorders, dilated cardiomyopathy): arrhythmia, dyspnoea, chest pain, heart failure;
gastrointestinal lesions (dilation of the oesophagus or colon i.e. megaoesophagus, megacolon): difﬁculty
swallowing, severe constipation.
Individuals with immunosuppression have a higher risk of developing organ damage than the general population.
 [1]
Acute phase:
Identiﬁcation of Trypanosoma cruzi by direct microscopy of fresh blood or blood concentrated by
microhematocrit method.
In case of strong clinical suspicion despite no deﬁnitive diagnosis from direct microscopy, perform serologic
tests after a delay of approximately 1 month (see "Chronic phase").
Chronic phase:
Identiﬁcation of anti-Trypanosoma cruzi antibodies by serologic tests, e.g. enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
(ELISA), hemagglutination inhibition assay (HAI), indirect immunoﬂuorescence (IIF) or rapid diagnostic test (RDT).
For a deﬁnitive diagnosis, two different serological tests should be performed simultaneously; in case of
conﬂicting results, a third test is recommended. b
ECG may demonstrate conduction disorders.
Chest or abdominal x-ray may demonstrate cardiomegaly, megaoesophagus or megacolon.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Aetiologic treatment
For information:
Symptomatic treatment
See Seizures (Chapter 1), Pain (Chapter 1) and Heart failure (Chapter 12).
Prevention
 
ReferencesAcute or chronic Chagas disease can be treated with either benznidazole or nifurtimox. However, treatment is not
recommended if patient has already developed cardiac or digestive complications.
Close clinical monitoring should be provided due to the frequent occurrence of adverse effects. Where available,
blood tests (complete blood count, liver and renal function tests) should be performed before, during and after
treatment.
Protocols vary according to the country, follow national recommendations.
  Age Dose and duration
benznidazole
PO( (a)2 to 12 years [3]5 to 8 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 60 days
> 12 years and adults [4]5 to 7 mg/kg daily in 2 divided doses for 60 days
nifurtimox
PO (b) [3]≤ 10 years 15 to 20 mg/kg daily in 3 to 4 divided doses for 90 days
11 to 16 years 12.5 to 15 mg/kg daily in 3 to 4 divided doses for 90 days
≥ 17 years and adults 8 to 10 mg/kg daily in 3 to 4 divided doses for 90 days
(a)Benznidazole is contra-indicated in pregnancy, breastfeeding and in patient with severe hepatic/renal impairment.
(b)Nifurtimox is contra-indicated in pregnancy, breastfeeding, patients with severe hepatic/renal impairment or history of
severe mental disorders or seizures. Adverse effects (gastrointestinal disturbances, agitation, sleeping disorders, seizure)
are frequent and reversible and should not necessarily result in discontinuation of treatment. Avoid alcohol and fatty meals
during treatment.
Individual protection against bite from triatomine bugs: use of long-lasting insecticidal net.
In healthcare settings: standard precautions to avoid contamination with soiled materials or potentially infected
body ﬂuids.
Blood transfusions: advise patients with Chagas disease not to donate blood. In endemic areas, screen donor
blood for Trypanosoma cruzi antibodies. 
Footnotes
(a)For more information on geographical distribution of cases of T. cruzi infection:
http://gamapserver.who.int/mapLibrary/Files/Maps/Global_chagas_2009.png
(b)If resources are limited, ELISA alone can be performed. If the result is positive, a second serologic test should then be
performed to conﬁrm the diagnosis before starting treatment. This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
1.Pan American Health Organization. Guidelines for diagnosis and treatment of Chagas disease. Washington, D.C. 2019.
http://iris.paho.org/xmlui/bitstream/handle/123456789/49653/9789275120439_eng.pdf?sequence=6&isAllowed=y
2.Rassi A, Marin-Neto J. Seminar: Chagas disease. The Lancet, Volume 375, ISSUE 9723, P1388-1402, April 17, 2010.
3.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Parasites - American Trypanosomiasis.
https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/chagas/ [Accessed 17 February 2020]
4.World Health Organization. WHO Model Prescribing Information: Drugs Used in Parasitic Diseases - Second Edition. Geneva.
1995. 
https://apps.who.int/iris/handle/10665/41765 [Accessed 6 May 2020]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Leishmaniases
The leishmaniases are a group of parasitic diseases caused by protozoa of the genus Leishmania, transmitted by the
bite of a sandﬂy. Over 20 species cause disease in man.
Clinical features
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis
Visceral leishmaniasis
Visceral leishmaniasis (kala azar) is a systemic disease, resulting in pancytopenia, immunosuppression, and death if left
untreated.
Post-kala azar dermal leishmaniasis
Macular, nodular or papular skin rash of unknown aetiology, particularly on the face, and typically occurring after
apparent cure of visceral leishmaniasis.
Laboratory
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis
Visceral leishmaniasisCutaneous leishmaniasis is endemic in more than 70 countries in South and Central America, Middle East, Central
Asia, and Africa.
Mucocutaneous leishmaniasis occurs in Latin America and, more rarely, in Africa (Ethiopia, Sudan).
Visceral leishmaniasis occurs in more than 60 countries in East and North Africa, South and Central Asia, Southern
Europe, and South and Central America.
Single or multiple lesions on the uncovered parts of the body: an erythematous papule begins at the sandﬂy bite,
enlarges to a nodule and extends in surface and depth to form a scabbed ulcer. Ulcers are painless, unless there is
secondary bacterial or fungal infection.
Usually, lesions heal spontaneously, leaving a scar, and result in lifelong protection from disease.
Lesions may also spread to the mucosa (mouth, nose, conjunctiva) giving rise to the mucocutaneous form, which
may cause severe disﬁgurement.
Prolonged (> 2 weeks) irregular fever, splenomegaly, and weight loss are the main signs.
Other signs include: anaemia, diarrhoea, epistaxis, lymphadenopathy, moderate hepatomegaly.
Bacterial diarrhoea, pneumonia, and tuberculosis may develop due to immunosuppression.
Parasitological diagnosis: identiﬁcation of Giemsa-stained parasites in smears of tissue biopsy from the edge of
the ulcer.
No useful serological tests.
Parasitological diagnosis: identiﬁcation of Giemsa-stained parasites in smears of splenic, bone marrow, or lymph
node aspiration-biopsy. Splenic aspiration is the most sensitive technique but carries a theoretical risk of potentially
fatal haemorrhage.
Serological diagnosis: rK39 dipstick test and direct agglutination test (DAT) can be used for diagnosis of primary
visceral leishmaniasis in clinically suspect cases. Diagnosis of relapse is only by parasitological conﬁrmation.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment
The various species of Leishmania respond differently to drugs. Follow national recommendations.
For information:
Cutaneous and mucocutaneous leishmaniasis
Visceral leishmaniasis
Visceral leishmaniasis in East Africa
 
 
Visceral leishmaniasis in South Asia
 
 
For all patients with visceral leishmaniasis, hydration, nutritional support and treatment of intercurrent infections
(malaria, dysentery, pneumonia, etc.) are essential.
Tuberculosis and/or HIV infection may also be present and should be suspected if relapse occurs more than once or in
the event of treatment failure.Cutaneous lesions generally heal spontaneously in 3 to 6 months. Treatment is only indicated if lesions are
persistent (> 6 months), disﬁguring, ulcerating, or disseminated.
Forms with a single lesion or few lesions: start with local treatment with a pentavalent antimonial: sodium
stibogluconate or meglumine antimoniate, 1 to 2 ml inﬁltrated into the lesion if it is a nodule and into the edges
and base around the crust if it is an ulcer.
It should be repeated every 3 to 7 days for 2 to 4 weeks. Once healing begins, the treatment can be stopped and
healing will continue.
IM treatment with a pentavalant antimonial (20 mg/kg daily for 10 to 20 days) is restricted to severe cases and must
be administered under close medical supervision.
Miltefosine PO (as for visceral leishmaniasis) for 28 days is effective in many forms of cutaneous leishmaniasis.
Ulcers are often secondarily infected with streptococci and staphylococci: administer suitable antibiotics.
Mucocutaneous forms: as for visceral leishmaniasis.
First-line treatment:
a pentavalent antimonial IM or slow IV: 20 mg/kg daily for 17 days
+ paromomycin IM: 15 mg (11 mg base)/kg daily for 17 days
Second-line treatment for relapse and for speciﬁc vulnerable groups: severe disease, pregnant women, patients
over 45 years:
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 6 to 10 days up to a total dose of 30 mg/kg
Treatment in HIV co-infected patients:
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 6 to 10 days up to a total dose of 30 mg/kg
+ miltefosine PO for 28 days:
Children 2 to 11 years: 2.5 mg/kg once daily
Children ≥ 12 years and < 25 kg: 50 mg once daily
Children ≥ 12 years and adults 25 to 50 kg: 50 mg 2 times daily
Adults > 50 kg: 50 mg 3 times daily
First-line treatment:
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 3 to 5 days up to a total dose of 15 mg/kg
or
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 10 mg/kg single dose
Second-line treatment for relapse:
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 3 to 5 mg/kg once daily for 5 to 8 days up to a total dose of 25 mg/kgThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Post-kala azar dermal leishmaniasis (PKDL)
Only patients with severe or disﬁguring disease or with lesions remaining for > 6 months, and young children with oral
lesions that interfere with feeding, are treated.
PKDL in East Africa
a pentavalent antimonial IM or slow IV: 20 mg/kg daily for 17 to 60 days
+ paromomycin IM: 15 mg (11 mg base)/kg daily for 17 days
or
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 2.5 mg/kg once daily for 20 days
or
miltefosine PO for 28 days (as for visceral leishmaniasis) may be beneﬁcial in HIV co-infected patients
PKDL in South Asia
liposomal amphotericin B IV infusion: 5 mg/kg 2 times weekly up to a total dose of 30 mg/kg
Prevention
Insecticide-treated mosquito nets.
Vector control and elimination of animal reservoir hosts.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Intestinal protozoan infections (parasitic
diarrhoea)
The most important intestinal protozoan infections are amoebiasis (Entamoeba histolytica), giardiasis (Giardia
lamblia), cryptosporidiosis (Cryptosporidium sp), cyclosporiasis (Cyclospora cayetanensis) and isosporiasis (Isospora
belli).
 
Intestinal protozoa are transmitted by the faecal-oral route (soiled hands, ingestion of food or water contaminated
with faeces) and may cause both individual cases of diarrhoea and epidemic diarrhoea outbreaks.
Clinical features
 
Laboratory
Deﬁnitive diagnosis relies on parasite identiﬁcation in stool specimens (trophozoites and cysts for giardia; oocysts for
cryptosporidium, cyclospora, isospora). Two to three samples, collected 2 to 3 days apart are necessary, as
pathogens are shed intermittently.
Treatment
 Amoebiasis gives rise to bloody diarrhoea (see Amoebiasis, Chapter 3).
Clinical presentation of giardiasis, cryptosporidiosis, cyclosporiasis and isosporiasis is very similar:
Diarrhoea is usually mild and self-limiting, except in children and patients with advanced HIV disease (CD4 < 200).
These patients are likely to develop severe, intermittent or chronic diarrhoea that may be complicated by
malabsorption with signiﬁcant wasting (or failure to gain weight in children) or severe dehydration.
Stools are usually watery, but steatorrhoea (pale, bulky, fatty stools) may be found in the event of secondary fat
malabsorption; stools may contain mucus.
Diarrhoea is usually associated with non-speciﬁc gastrointestinal symptoms (abdominal distension and cramps,
ﬂatulence, nausea, anorexia), but patients have low-grade fever or no fever.
Correct dehydration if present (for clinical features and management, see Dehydration, Chapter 1).
If the causal agent has been identiﬁed in the stool:
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 Giardiasis tinidazole PO single dose
Children: 50 mg/kg (max. 2 g) 
Adults: 2 g
or
metronidazole PO for 3 days
Children: 30 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 2 g once daily
Cryptosporidiosis In immunocompetent patients, no aetiological treatment; spontaneous
resolution in 1 to 2 weeks.
Cyclosporiasis co-trimoxazole PO for 7 days
Children: 25 mg SMX + 5 mg TMP/kg 2 times daily
Adults: 800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP 2 times daily
In immunocompetent patients, symptoms usually resolve spontaneous in 1 to 3
weeks. Treatment is given in case of severe or prolonged symptoms.
Isoporiasis co-trimoxazole PO for 7 to 10 days
Adults: 800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP 2 times daily
In immunocompetent patients, symptoms usually resolve spontaneous in 2 to 3
weeks. Treatment is given in case of severe or prolonged symptoms.
If reliable stool examination cannot be carried out: parasitic diarrhoeas cannot be differentiated on clinical grounds,
nor is it possible to distinguish these from non- parasitic diarrhoeas. An empirical treatment (using tinidazole or
metronidazole and co-trimoxazole as above, together or in succession) may be tried in the case of prolonged
diarrhoea or steatorrhoea. In patients with HIV infection, see empirical treatment (HIV infections and AIDS, Chapter
8).
In patients with advanced HIV disease, cryptosporidiosis, cyclosporiasis and isosporiasis are opportunistic
infections; the most effective intervention is the treatment of the underlying HIV infection with antiretrovirals.
Patients remain at high risk for dehydration/death until immunity is restored.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Flukes
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Infection/Epidemiology Clinical features/Diagnosis Treatment
Lung ﬂukes
Paragonimus sp
Distribution: South-East
Asia, China, parts of
Cameroon, Nigeria,
Gabon, Congo, Colombia,
Peru
Transmission: eating raw
freshwater crustaceansThe two most prominent symptoms are prolonged (> 2 weeks)
productive cough and intermittent haemoptysis (rusty-brown sputum).
In endemic areas, paragonimosis should be considered whenever
pulmonary tuberculosis is suspected as the clinical and radiological
features overlap. Paragonimosis is conﬁrmed when eggs are
detected in sputum (or possibly in stools).praziquantel
PO
Children 4 years
and over and
adults:
25 mg/kg 3
times daily for 2
days
Hepatobiliary ﬂukes
Fasciola hepatica and
gigantica
Distribution: worldwide, in
areas where sheep and
cattle are raised
Transmission: eating
uncooked aquatic plants 
During migration phase: asthenia, prolonged fever, myalgia, right
upper quadrant pain, mild hepatomegaly; sometimes, allergic signs
(e.g. pruritus). At this stage, the diagnosis is rarely considered and can
only be conﬁrmed through serology; parasitological examination of
stools is always negative.
Once adult ﬂukes are present in the biliary tract: presentation
resembles cholelithiasis: right upper quadrant pain, recurrent episodes
of obstructive jaundice/ febrile cholangitis. The diagnosis is
conﬁrmed when parasite eggs are detected in stools (or ﬂukes are
seen in the biliary tract with sonography). 
triclabendazole
PO
Children and
adults:
10 mg/kg single
dose
May repeat in
24 hours in the
event of severe
infection
Opisthorchis felineus
(Asia, Eastern Europe)
Opisthorchis viverrini
(Cambodia, Laos,
Vietnam, Thailand)
Clonorchis sinensis
(China, Koera, Vietnam)
Transmission: eating
raw/undercooked
freshwater ﬁshAbdominal pain and diarrhoea. With heavy infection, hepatobiliary
symptoms: hepatomegaly, right upper quadrant pain, jaundice or
episodes of febrile cholangitis. The diagnosis is conﬁrmed when
parasite eggs are detected in stools.praziquantel
PO
Children 4 years
and over and
adults:
25 mg/kg 3
times daily for 2
days
Intestinal ﬂukes
Fasciolopsis buski
(India, Bangladesh,
South-East Asia)
Heterophyes
heterophyes
(South-East Asia, Nile
delta)
Metagonimus yokogawai
(Siberia, China, Korea)
Transmission: eating
uncooked aquatic plants
(F. buski),Symptoms are limited to diarrhoea and epigastric or abdominal pain.
With massive infection, F. buski can cause oedematous allergic
reactions (including ascites, anasarca).
The diagnosis is conﬁrmed when parasite eggs are detected in
stools.praziquantel
PO
Children 4 years
and over and
adults:
25 mg/kg 3
times daily, 1
dayThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 
 raw/undercooked ﬁsh
(other species)
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Schistosomiases
Schistosomiases are acute or chronic visceral parasitic diseases due to 5 species of trematodes (schistosomes). The
three main species infecting humans are Schistosoma haematobium, Schistosoma mansoni and Schistosoma
japonicum. Schistosoma mekongi and Schistosoma intercalatum have a more limited distribution.
 
Humans are infected while wading/bathing in fresh water infested with schistosome larvae. Symptoms occurring during
the phases of parasite invasion (transient localized itching as larvae penetrate the skin) and migration (allergic
manifestations and gastrointestinal symptoms during migration of schistosomules) are frequently overlooked. In
general, schistosomiasis is suspected when symptoms of established infection become evident. Each species gives
rise to a speciﬁc clinical form: genito-urinary schistosomiasis due to S. haematobium, intestinal schistosomiasis due S.
mansoni, S. japonicum, S. mekongi and S. intercalatum.
 
The severity of the disease depends on the parasite load. Heavily infected patients are prone to visceral lesions with
potentially irreversible sequelae. Children aged 5 to 15 years are particularly at risk: prevalence and parasite load are
highest in this age group.
 
An antiparasitic treatment should be administered to reduce the risk of severe lesions, even if there is a likelihood of re-
infection.
Clinical features
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 Parasite/Epidemiology aClinical features/Diagnosis
(established infection)
Genito-urinary
schistosomiasisS. haematobium
Distribution: Africa,
Madagascar and the
Arabian peninsulaUrinary manifestations:
In endemic areas, urinary schistosomiasis should be
suspected in any patients who complain of macroscopic
haematuria (red coloured urine throughout, or at the end of,
micturition). Haematuria is frequently associated with
polyuria/dysuria (frequent and painful micturition).
In patients, especially children and adolescents, with urinary
symptoms, visual inspection of the urine (and dipstick test
for microscopic haematuria if the urine appears grossly
normal) is indispensible.
Presumptive treatment is recommended in the presence of
macro- or microscopic haematuria, when parasitological
conﬁrmation (parasite eggs detected in urine) cannot be
obtained.
Genital manifestations:
In women, symptoms of genital infection (white-yellow or
bloody vaginal discharge, itching, lower abdominal pain,
dyspareunia) or vaginal lesions resembling genital warts or
ulcerative lesions on the cervix; in men, haematospermia
(blood in the semen).
If left untreated: risk of recurrent urinary tract infections,
ﬁbrosis/calciﬁcation of the bladder and ureters, bladder
cancer; increased susceptibility to sexually transmitted
infections and risk of infertility.
In endemic areas, genito-urinary schistosomiasis may be a
differential diagnosis to the genito-urinary tuberculosis, and in
women, to the sexually transmitted infections (especially in
women with an history of haematuria).
Intestinal
schistosomiasisS. mansoni
Distribution: tropical
Africa, Madagascar, the
Arabian peninsula, South
America (especially Brazil)
S. japonicum
Distribution: China,
Indonesia, the Philippines
S. mekongi
Distribution: parts of Lao
PDR, Cambodia (along the
Mekong River)
S. intercalatum
Distribution: parts of DRC,
Congo, Gabon, Cameroon,
ChadNon-speciﬁc digestive symptoms (abdominal pain; diarrhoea,
intermittent or chronic, with or without blood) and
hepatomegaly.
For S. intercalatum: digestive symptoms only (rectal pain,
tenesmus, rectal prolapse, bloody diarrhoea).
If left untreated: risk of hepatic ﬁbrosis, portal hypertension,
cirrhosis, gastrointestinal haemorrhage (hematemesis, melena,
etc.), except with S. intercalatum (less pathogenic than other
intestinal schistosomes, no severe hepatic lesions).
The diagnosis is conﬁrmed when parasite eggs are detected
in stools.
In the absence of reliable parasitological diagnosis: in areas
where intestinal schistosomiasis is common, diarrhoea
(especially bloody diarrhoea) with abdominal pain and/or
hepatomegaly may be a basis for presumptive diagnosis and
treatment.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Treatment
praziquantel PO
Children 4 years and over and adults:
 
References [1] [2] 
 b  
S. haematobium, S. mansoni, S. intercalatum: 40 mg/kg single dose or 2 doses of 20 mg/kg administered 4 hours
apart
S. japonicum, S. mekongi: 2 doses of 30 mg/kg or 3 doses of 20 mg/kg administered 4 hours apart
Footnotes
(a)For more information on geographic distribution of schistosomiasis:
https://www.who.int/schistosomiasis/Schistosomiasis_2012-01.png?ua=1
(b)For the treatment of schistosomiasis, praziquantel may me administered to pregnant women.
1.Treatment Guidelines from The Medical Letter. Vol. 11 (Suppl). Drugs for Parasitic Infections. 2013.
https://www.uab.edu/medicine/gorgas/images/docs/syllabus/2015/03_Parasites/RxParasitesMedicalLetter2013.pdf [Accesse
d 25 May 2020]
2.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Schistosomiasis. Resources for Health Professionals. 2018.
https://www.cdc.gov/parasites/schistosomiasis/health_professionals/index.html#tx [Accessed 25 May 2020]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Cestodes
Cestodes (adult forms)
Cestodes (larvae)ParasitesClinical
features/LaboratoryTreatment Transmission/Prevention
Taeniasis
Taenia saginata
Taenia solium
(worldwide)Often asymptomatic
Segments expelled in the
stools, sometimes
gastrointestinal disturbances
(epigastric or abdominal
pain, nausea, diarrhoea)
Laboratory: eggs in stools
or collected from perianal
skin (scotch tape method),
segments in stoolspraziquantel PO
Children 4 years and
over and adults:
5 to 10 mg/kg single
dose (a) Transmission by eating
raw or under-cooked meat:
Prevention:beef for T. saginata
pork for T. solium
individual: cook meat
thoroughly
collective:
slaughterhouse
monitoring
Diphyllobothriasis
Diphyllobothrium latum
(temperate or cold lake
areas)Often asymptomatic
In the event of heavy
infection: mild
gastrointestinal
disturbances, anaemia due
to vitamin Bdeﬁciency
associated with (rare)
neurological sequelae
Laboratory: eggs in stools12 praziquantel PO
Children 4 years and
over and adults:
5 to 10 mg/kg single
dose
If anaemia: vitamin B
+ folic acid (a) 
12Transmission by eating
raw or under- cooked
freshwater ﬁsh
Prevention:
individual: cook ﬁsh
thoroughly
Hymenolepiasis
Hymenolepis nana
(worldwide)Often asymptomatic
In the event of heavy
infection: gastrointestinal
disturbances (epigastric
pain)
Laboratory: eggs in stoolspraziquantel PO
Children 4 years and
over and adults:
15 to 25 mg/kg single
dose (a) Transmission by faecal-
oral route or auto-infection
Prevention:
individual: hand washing,
nail cutting
collective: hygiene and
sanitation (water,
latrines, etc.)
(a)Praziquantel may be administered to pregnant women with T. solium taeniasis. For the other indications, treatment can
usually be deferred until after delivery.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Parasites Clinical features/Laboratory Treatment Transmission/Prevention
Cysticercosis
Taenia solium
(worldwide)
Laboratory: hypereosinophilia in
blood and cerebrospinal ﬂuidMuscular: asymptomatic or
myalgia
Subcutaneous: nodules
Neurological
(neurocysticercosis): headache,
convulsions, coma, etc.
Ocular: exophthalmia,
strabismus, iritis, etc.Neurological and ocular
cysticercosis should be
managed in specialized
facilities.
Antiparasitic treatment
without diagnosis of
location by
computerirsed
tomography and/or
magnetic resonance
imaging can worsen the
symptoms even threat
the life. Neurosurgical
treatment can be
required.Transmission by eating
food contaminated with T.
solium eggs or auto-
infection
Prevention:
individual: treat T. solium
carriers, hygiene, cook
meat thoroughly
Hydatid cyst
Echinococcus
granulosus
(South America,
North, East and South
Africa, Western
Europe)Cysts located in the liver (60% of
cases); lungs (30% of cases), and,
less frequently, in other sites
including the brain.
Long asymptomatic period. The
cyst becomes symptomatic when
complications develop (biliary
obstruction; anaphylactic shock in
the event of rupture into peritoneal
cavity, vessels or an organ; febrile
painful jaundice in the event of
rupture into the biliary tree, etc.).First-line treatment:
surgical excision
albendazole PO is
useful in addition to, or
instead of, surgery:
Children over 2 years
and adults under 60 kg:
7.5 mg/kg 2 times daily
Adults over 60 kg:
400 mg 2 times daily
Treatment duration:
In addition to surgery
(pre-operatively or
post- operatively):
continuous course of
minimum 2 months or at
least two 28-day
courses with a drug-
free interval of 14 days.
Inoperable cases: 28-
day courses with drug-
free intervals of 14
days, for 3 to 6 months
(on average), possibly
up to 1 year. (b) Transmission:
Prevention:direct: contact with
dogs
indirect: water and food
contaminated by dog
faeces
individual: avoid contact
with dogs
collective: eliminate
stray dogs, monitor
slaughterhouses
(b)Albendazole is contra-indicated during the ﬁrst trimester of pregnancy.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Nematode infections
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Infection/Epidemiology Clinical features/Diagnosis Treatment
Ascariasis (roundworms)
Ascaris lumbricoides
Distribution: worldwide,
mainly in tropical and
subtropical
Transmission: ingestion of
ascaris eggs(a)During larval migration
Loefﬂer ’s syndrome: transient pulmonary
symptoms (dry cough, dyspnoea, wheezing) and
mild fever.
Once adult worms are present in the intestine
Abdominal pain and distension. In general, the
diagnosis is made when adult worms are
expelled from the anus (or occasionally from the
mouth). Ascaris are large (15-30 cm), cylindrical
worms, pinkish-white, with slightly tapered ends.
Complications
Ascariasis is usually benign, but massive
infestation may cause intestinal obstruction
(abdominal pain, vomiting, constipation),
especially in children < 5 years. Worms may
accidentally migrate to gall bladder, liver or
peritoneum, causing jaundice, liver abscess, or
peritonitis.
Ascaris eggs may be detected through
parasitological examination of stools.albendazole PO single dose
Children > 6 months and adults:
400 mg
(200 mg in children > 6 months
but < 10 kg)
or
mebendazole PO for 3 days
Children > 6 months and adults:
100 mg 2 times daily
(50 mg 2 times daily in children
> 6 months but < 10 kg)
Trichuriasis (whipworms)
Trichuris trichiura
Distribution and
transmission:
as for A. lumbricoides(a)In heavy infection: abdominal pain and diarrhoea.
In massive infection: chronic bloody diarrhea,
tenesmus, rectal prolapse due to frequent
attempts to defecate, especially in children.
Worms may sometimes be seen on the rectal
mucosa when prolapsed: these are grayish-
white, 3-5 cm in length, in the shape of a whip,
with a thickened body and a long, threadlike
extremity.
Trichuris eggs may be detected through
parasitological examination of stools.albendazole PO for 3 days
Children > 6 months and adults:
400 mg once daily
(200 mg once daily in children >
6 months but < 10 kg)
or
mebendazole PO for 3 days,
as for ascariasis.
A single dose of albendazole
or mebendazole is often
insufﬁcient.
Ankylostomiase
Ancylostoma duodenale
Necator americanus
Distribution: tropical and
subtropical regions
Transmission: larval skin
penetration following
contact (feet, hands) with
contaminated soil(a)During larval penetration/migration
Cutaneous signs (pruritic papulo-vesicular rash
at the site of penetration, usually the feet) and
pulmonary symptoms (similar to ascariasis).
Once adult worms are present in the intestine
Mild abdominal pain. Attachment of the parasite
to the mucosa leads to chronic blood loss and
anaemia (in endemic areas, antihelminthic
treatment is recommended for patients with
iron-deﬁciency anaemia).
Hookworm eggs may be detected through
parasitological examination of stools.albendazole single dose (as
for ascariasis) is much more
effective than mebendazole
single dose.
When using mebendazole, a 3-
day treatment (as for
ascariasis) is recommended.
Treatment of anaemia
(Chapter 1).
Strongyloidiasis Acute strongyloidiasis First line treatment is:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Strongyloides stercoralis
Distribution: humid tropical
regions
Transmission: larval skin
penetration and auto-
infectionDuring larval penetration/migration:
cutaneous signs (erythema and pruritus at the
site of penetration, which may persist several
weeks) and pulmonary symptoms (similar to
ascariasis).
Once larvae are present in the intestine:
gastrointestinal symptoms (bloating,
abdominal and epigastric pain, vomiting,
diarrhoea).
Chronic strongyloidiasis
Intestinal larvae may re-infect their host (auto-
infection) by penetrating through the intestinal
wall or by migrating transcutaneously from
perianal skin. Chronic infections result in
prolonged or recurrent pulmonary and
gastrointestinal symptoms. Transcutaneous
migration of intestinal larvae gives rise to a
typical rash (larva currens), mainly in the anal
region and on the trunk: sinuous, raised, linear,
migrating lesion, intensely pruritic, moving rapidly
(5 to 10 cm/hour) and lasting several hours or
days.
Complications
Hyperinfection (massive infestation) results in
exacerbation of pulmonary and gastrointestinal
symptoms, and possible dissemination of larvae
to atypical locations, (CNS, heart, etc.). This
form occurs mainly in patients receiving
immunosuppressive therapy (e.g.
corticosteroids).
Strongyloides larvae may be detected through
parasitological examination of stools.ivermectin PO single dose
Children > 15 kg and adults:
200 micrograms/kg, on an
empty stomach
While less effective, a 3-day
treatment with albendazole
PO (as for trichuriasis) may be
an alternative.
Hyperinfections are refractory
to conventional therapy.
Prolonged or intermittent
multiple-dose regimens are
required.(b)
Enterobiasis (pinworms)
Enterobius vermicularis
Distribution: worldwide
Transmission: faecal-oral
route or auto-infectionAnal pruritus, more intense at night, vulvovaginitis
in girls (rare). In practice, the diagnosis is most
often made when worms are seen on the
perianal skin (or in the stool in heavy infestation).
Pinworms are small (1 cm), mobile, white,
cylindrical worms with slightly tapered ends.
Pinworm eggs may be collected from the anal
area (scotch tape method) and detected under
the microscope.albendazole PO single dose,
as for ascariasis
or
mebendazole PO single dose
Children > 6 months and adults:
100 mg
(50 mg in children > 6 months
but < 10 kg)
A second dose may be given
after 2 to 4 weeks.
Trichinellosis
Trichinella sp
Distribution: worldwide,
particularly frequent in Asia
(Thailand, Laos, China, etc.)Enteric phase (1 to 2 days after ingestion of
infected meat)
Self-limited episode of diarrhoea and abdominal
pain lasting several days.albendazole PO for 10 to 15
days
Children > 2 years:
5 mg/kg 2 times daily
Adults:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 Roundworms, whipworms and hookworms frequently co-infect the same host. This should be taken into account
when prescribing antihelminthic treatment.
 
 The migrating larvae of Ancylostoma braziliense and caninum (hookworms of cats and dogs) also present as a
pruritic, inﬂammatory, creeping eruption in humans (cutaneous larva migrans) but with a slower rate of progression and a
longer duration (several weeks or months). Treatment is with albendazole (400 mg single dose or once daily for 3 days
in children > 6 months and adults; 200 mg in children > 6 months but < 10 kg) or ivermectin (200 micrograms/kg single
dose).Transmission: consumption
of raw or undercooked
meat containing trichinella
larvae (pork, wart-hog, bear,
dog, etc.)Muscular phase (about 1 week after ingestion)
High fever; muscular pain (ocular [pain on eye
movement], masseters [limitation of mouth
opening], throat and neck [pain with swallowing
and speech], trunk and limbs); facial or bilateral
peri-orbital oedema; conjunctival haemorrhage,
subungual haemorrhage; headache. Typical
features are not always present and the patient
may present with a non-speciﬁc ﬂu-like
syndrome.
Other features, such as dietary habits
(consuming pork/raw meat), suggestive
symptoms (fever > 39 °C and myalgia and facial
oedema) in several individuals who have shared
the same meal (e.g. ceremony) or
hypereosinophilia > 1000/mm, reinforce the
clinical suspicion.3
Deﬁnitive diagnosis: muscle biopsy; serology
(ELISA, Western Blot).400 mg 2 times daily
or
mebendazole PO for 10 to 15
days
Children > 2 years:
2.5 mg/kg 2 times daily
Adults:
200 mg 2 times daily
plus, regardless of which anti-
helminthic is chosen:
prednisolone PO
0.5 to 1 mg/kg once daily for
the duration of treatment
(a)
(b)
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Filariasis
 
 
 
 
Filariases are helminthiases due to tissue-dwelling nematode worms (ﬁlariae). Human to human transmission takes
place through the bite of an insect vector.
 
The most important pathogens are outlined in the table below. Mixed infections are common in co-endemic regions.
 
Each ﬁlarial species is found in 2 principal developmental stages: macroﬁlariae (adult worms) and microﬁlariae (larval
offspring). The treatment depends on the pathogenic stage of the species considered and targets microﬁlariae for O.
volvulus and macroﬁlariae for the other species.
 
Classical antiﬁlarial agents include diethylcarbamazine (DEC), ivermectin and albendazole. Doxycycline is used solely in
the treatment of O. volvulus and lymphatic ﬁlarial worms, which harbour an endosymbiotic bacterium (Wolbachia)
sensitive to doxycycline.Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
Loiasis.
Lymphatic ﬁlariasis (LF)
 Species/InfectionsLocation of
macroﬁlariaeLocation of 
microﬁlariaePathogenic 
stagePresence
of Wolbachia
Onchocerca volvulus
(onchocerciasis)Subcutaneous
nodulesSkin and eye Microﬁlariae Yes
Loa loa
(loiasis)Subcutaneous
tissueBlood Macroﬁlariae No
Wuchereria bancrofti, Brugia
malayi and Brugia timori
(lymphatic ﬁlariasis)Lymph vessels Blood Macroﬁlariae Yes
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Onchocerciasis (river blindness)
The distribution of onchocerciasis is linked to that of its vector (Simulium), which reproduces near rapidly ﬂowing rivers
in intertropical Africa (99% of cases), Latin America (Guatemala, Mexico, Ecuador, Colombia, Venezuela, Brazil) and
Yemen.
Clinical features
In endemic areas, the following signs, alone or in combination, are suggestive of onchocerciasis:
Laboratory
Treatment
Antiparasitic treatmentOnchocercomas: painless subcutaneous nodules containing adult worms, usually found over a bony prominence
(iliac crest, trochanters, sacrum, rib cage, skull, etc.), measuring several mm or cm in size, ﬁrm, smooth, round or
oval, mobile or adherent to underlying tissue; single, or multiple and clustered.
Acute papular onchodermatitis: papular rash, sometimes diffuse but often conﬁned to the buttocks or lower
extremities, intensely itchy, associated with scratch marks, often superinfected (“ﬁlarial scabies”). This arises from
dermal invasion by microﬁlariae. a 
Late chronic skin lesions: patchy depigmentation on the shins (“leopard skin”), skin atrophy or areas of dry,
thickened, peeling skin (licheniﬁcation; “lizard skin”).
Visual disturbances and ocular lesions: see Onchocerciasis, Chapter 5.
Detection of the microﬁlariae in the skin (skin snip biopsy, iliac crest).
If the skin biopsy is positive, look for loiasis in regions where loiasis is co-endemic (mainly in Central Africa).
Diethylcarbamazine is contra-indicated (risk of severe ocular lesions).
Doxycycline PO (200 mg once daily for 4 weeks; if possible 6 weeks) kills a signiﬁcant percentage of adult worms
and progressively reduces the number of O. volvulus microﬁlariae. It is contraindicated in children < 8 years and
pregnant or breast-feeding women. b 
Ivermectin PO is the drug of choice: 150 micrograms/kg single dose; a 2 dose should be administered after 3
months if clinical signs persist. Repeat the treatment every 6 or 12 months to maintain the parasite load below the
threshold at which clinical signs appear. Ivermectin is not recommended in children < 5 years or < 15 kg and
pregnant women.nd
 c 
In case of co-infection with Loa loa or in regions where loiasis is co-endemic, ivermectin should be administered
with caution (risk of severe adverse reactions in patients with high L. loa microﬁlarial load):
If it is possible to test for Loa loa (thick blood ﬁlm):
Conﬁrm and quantify the microﬁlaraemia. Administer the appropriate treatment according to the microﬁlarial
load (see Loiasis).
If it is not possible to perform a thick ﬁlm examination, take a history from the patient:
If the patient has received a previous treatment with ivermectin without developing serious adverse reactions
(see Loiasis), administer the treatment.
If the patient has never received ivermectin nor developed signs of loiasis (migration of an adult worm under the
conjunctiva, or « Calabar » swellings), administer the treatment.
If the patient already has developed signs of loiaisis and if onchocerciasis has a signiﬁcant clinical impact,
administer ivermectin under close supervision (see Loiasis) or use an alternative (doxycycline, as above).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Nodulectomy (surgical removal of onchocercomas)
Nodules are benign, often deep, and their ablation does not treat onchocerciasis. Thus, nodulectomy is reserved for
cranial nodules (their proximity to the eye is a risk factor for visual compromise) or nodules which are cosmetically
unacceptable. In other cases, refrain from nodulectomy. Nodulectomy is performed under local anaesthesia, in an
appropriately equipped facility.
 In the case of concomitant lymphatic ﬁlariasis: administer ivermectin ﬁrst then start treatment for lymphatic
ﬁlariasis with doxycycline PO (see Lymphatic ﬁlariasis) one week later.
Footnotes
(a)Differential diagnosis is sarcoptic scabies (Scabies, Chapter 4).
(b)Elimination of Wolbachia reduces the longevity and fertility of the macroﬁlariae, and thus the production of new microﬁlariae
within the organism.
(c)Ivermectin kills microﬁlariae and disrupts production of microﬁlariae by adult worms. However the treatment must be
administered at regular intervals since it does not kill adult worms.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Loiasis
The distribution of loiasis is linked to that of its vector (Chrysops) in forests or savannah with gallery forests in West or
Central Africa (limits West: Benin; East: Uganda; North: Sudan and South: Angola).
Clinical features
Laboratory
Treatment
Antiparasitic treatment
 
 
 
 
1)  L. loa microﬁlaraemia is < 1,000-2,000 mf/ml
A 28-day treatment of DEC may be started using a small dose: 6 mg on D1, i.e. 1/8 of a 50 mg tablet 2 times
daily.
Double the dose every day up to 200 mg 2 times daily in adults (1.5 mg/kg 2 times daily in children).
If microﬁlaraemia or symptoms persist, a second treatment is given 4 weeks later.
If DEC is contra-indicated due to possible or conﬁrmed co-infection with O. volvulus, ivermectin (150
microgams/kg single dose) treats onchocerciasis, and reduces pruritus and frequency of Calabar swellings.
The treatment may be repeated every month or every 3 months.
 The subconjunctival migration of an adult worm is pathognomonic of Loa loa infection. 
Localised subcutaneous swellings, allergic in origin, transient (several hours or days), painless, non-pitting, appearing
anywhere on the body, frequently the upper extremities and face, often associated with localised or generalised
pruritus (« Calabar swellings »).
Onset of pruritus, in the absence of other signs.
Subcutaneous migration of an adult worm: pruritic, palpable red cord-like linear lesion, sinuous, advancing (1
cm/hour), disappearing rapidly with no trace. Such migration generally arises following treatment with
diethylcarbamazine, rarely spontaneously. a 
Detection of microﬁlariae in the peripheral blood (thick ﬁlm, stained with Giemsa). Blood specimens should be
collected between 10 am and 5 pm. Quantify microﬁlaraemia even if the diagnosis is certain, since treatment is
determined by the intensity of the parasite load.
If the thick ﬁlm is positive, look for onchocerciasis in regions where onchocerciasis is coendemic (mainly in Central
Africa).
Diethylcarbamazine (DEC) is the only macroﬁlaricide available but is contra-indicated in:
Patients with microﬁlaraemia > 2000 mf/ml (risk of severe encephalopathy, with poor prognosis).
Patients co-infected with O. volvulus (risk of severe eye lesions).
Pregnant women, infants, and patients in poor general condition.
Ivermectin (and possibly albendazole) is used to reduce microﬁlaraemia before administration of DEC; however,
ivermectin administration may trigger encephalopathy in patients with very high Loa loa microﬁlaraemia (> 30 000
mf/ml).
Doxycycline is not indicated since Loa loa does not harbour Wolbachia.
Management:
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
2)  L. loa microﬁlaraemia is between 2,000 and 8,000 mf/ml
Reduce microﬁlaraemia with ivermectin (150 micrograms/kg single dose); repeat the treatment every month if
necessary; administer DEC when the microﬁlaraemia is < 2000 mf/ml.
 
3)  L. loa microﬁlaraemia is between 8,000 and 30,000 mf/ml
Treatment with ivermectin (150 micrograms/kg single dose) may cause marked functional impairment for
several days. Close supervision and support from family member(s) are necessary. Prescribe paracetamol as
well for 7 days.
 
4)  L. loa microﬁlaraemia is > 30,000 mf/ml
Extraction of macroﬁlariae
Subcutaneous migration of a microﬁlaria usually results from treatment with DEC; the worm will die beneath the skin
and extracting it serves no purpose.
 
Removal of an adult worm from the conjunctiva: see Loasis, Chapter 5.
  b 
If the loiasis is well tolerated, it is preferable to refrain from treatment: the disease is benign and treatment
with ivermectin may cause very severe adverse reactions (encephalopathy), albeit rarely.
If loiasis has a signiﬁcant clinical impact and/or the patient presents with symptomatic onchocerciasis
requiring treatment, ivermectin (150 micrograms/kg single dose) is administered for 5 days under supervision
in hospital. An attempt to ﬁrst reduce L. loa microﬁlaraemia using albendazole (200 mg 2 times daily for 3
weeks) is an option. When L. loa microﬁlaraemia is < 30 000 mf/ml, treat with ivermectin under close
supervision and support, then DEC when the microﬁlaraemia is < 2000 mf/ml. c 
Footnotes
(a)For differential diagnosis, see cutaneous larva migrans.
(b)Patients may present with various pain syndromes, be unable to move without help or unable to move at all. Monitoring is
necessary to determine whether the patient can manage activities of daily living, and provide assistance if necessary. If the
patient remains bedridden for several days, ensure pressure sores do not develop (mobilisation, repositioning).
(c)A severe reaction may occur on D2-D3. It is usually preceded by haemorrhages of the palpebral conjunctiva on D1-D2.
Routinely check for this sign by turning back the eyelids. Symptoms of post ivermectin encephalopathy are reversible and
the prognosis favourable, if the patient is correctly managed; the treatment is symptomatic until symptoms resolve. Avoid
the use of steroids due to adverse effects.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Lymphatic ﬁlariasis (LF)
The distribution of LF is linked to that of its mosquito vectors (Anopheles, Culex, Aedes, etc.):
90% of LF is due to W. bancrofti and 10% to Brugia spp.
Clinical features
 
Laboratory
Treatment
Antiparasitic treatmentW. bancrofti: sub-Saharan Africa, Madagascar, Egypt, India, South East Asia, Paciﬁc region, South America, The
Caribbean
B. malayi: South East Asia, China, India, Sri Lanka
B. timori: Timor
Acute recurrent inﬂammatory manifestations
Adenolymphangitis: lymph node(s) and red, warm, tender oedema along the length of a lymphatic channel, with or
without systemic signs (e.g. fever, nausea, vomiting). The inﬂammation may involve the lower limbs, external
genitalia and breast.
 In men: acute inﬂammation of the spermatic cord (funiculitis), epididymis and testicle (epididymo-orchitis).
Attacks resolve spontaneously within a week and recur regularly in patients with chronic disease.
Chronic manifestations
Lymphoedema: oedema of the lower extremity or external genitalia or breast, secondary to obstruction of the
lymphatics by macroﬁlariae. The oedema is reversible initially but then becomes chronic and increasingly severe:
hypertrophy of the area affected, progressive thickening of the skin (ﬁbrous thickening with formation of
creases, initially superﬁcial, but then deep, and verrucous lesions). The ﬁnal stage of lymphoedema is
elephantiasis.
In men: increase in volume of ﬂuid due to accumulation within the tunica vaginalis (hydrocoele, lymphocoele,
chylocoele); chronic epididymo-orchitis.
Chyluria: milky or rice-water urine (disruption of a lymphatic vessel in the urinary tract).
In patients parasitized by Brugia spp, genital lesions and chyluria are rare: lymphoedema is usually conﬁned to
below the knee.
Detection of microﬁlariae in the peripheral blood (thick ﬁlm); blood specimens should be collected between 9 pm
and 3 am. a 
In regions where loiasis and/or onchocerciasis are co-endemic, check for co-infection if the LF diagnosis is
positive.
Treatment is not administered during an acute attack.
Doxycycline PO, when administered as a prolonged treatment, eliminates the majority of macroﬁlariae and reduces
lymphoedema: 200 mg once daily for 4 weeks minimum. It is contraindicated in children < 8 years and pregnant or
breast-feeding women.
Diethylcarbamazine PO single dose (400 mg in adults; 3 mg/kg in children) may be an alternative but eliminates a
variable proportion of adult worms (up to 40%) and does not relieve symptoms; a prolonged treatment is no more
effective than single dose therapy. In addition, DEC is contra-indicated in patients with onchocerciasis or Loa
loa microﬁlarial load > 2000 mf/ml and in pregnant and breast-feeding women.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Control/prevention of inﬂammatory manifestations and infectious complications
Surgery
May be indicated in the treatment of chronic manifestations: advanced lymphoedema (diversion-reconstruction),
hydrocoele and its complications, chyluria.
 Ivermectin (weak or absent macroﬁlaricidal effect) and albendazole should not be used for the treatment of
individual cases (no effect on symptoms).
In the case of conﬁrmed or probable co-infection with O. volvulus: treat onchocerciasis ﬁrst, then administer
doxycycline.
Acute attacks: bed rest, elevation of the affected limb without bandaging, cooling of the affected limb (wet cloth,
cold bath) and analgesics; antibacterial or antifungal cream if necessary; antipyretics if fever (paracetamol) and
hydration.
Prevention of episodes of lymphangitis and lymphoedema: hygiene of the affected extremity, comfortable
footwear, immediate attention to secondary bacterial/fungal infections and wounds. b 
Established lymphoedema: bandaging of the affected limb by day, elevation of the affected extremity (after
removal of the bandage) when at rest, simple exercises (ﬂexion-extension of the feet when recumbent or upright,
rotation of the ankles); skin hygiene, as above.
Footnotes
(a)When test results are negative in a clinically suspect case, consider detection of antigens (ICT rapid test) and/or ultrasound
of the inguinal area in search of the « ﬁlarial dance sign ».
(b)Wash at least once daily (soap and water at room temperature), paying special attention to folds and interdigital areas;
rinse thoroughly and dry with a clean cloth; nail care.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 7: Bacterial diseases
Bacterial meningitis
Tetanus
Enteric (typhoid and paratyphoid) fevers
Brucellosis
Plague
Leptospirosis
Relapsing fever (borreliosis)
Louse-borne relapsing fever (LBRF)
Tick-borne relapsing fever (TBRF)
Eruptive rickettsioses
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Bacterial meningitis
Meningitis is an acute bacterial infection of the meninges, which may affect the brain and lead to irreversible
neurological damage and auditory impairment.
Bacterial meningitis is a medical emergency. The treatment is based on early parenteral administration of antibiotics
that penetrates well into the cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF). Empiric antibiotic therapy is administered if the pathogen cannot
be identiﬁed or while waiting for laboratory results.
The main bacteria responsible vary depending on age and/or context:
Meningitis in a non-epidemic context
L. monocytogenes is occasionally responsible for meningitis during this period.
 
Special conditions:
Meningitis in an epidemic context
In the Sahelian region (but not exclusively, e.g. Rwanda, Angola, Brazil), during the dry season, epidemics of
meningococcal meningitis (Neisseria meningitidis A or C or W135) affect children from 6 months of age, adolescents
and adults. In these regions, whether during epidemics or not, all the above pathogens can be found, especially in young
children.
Clinical features
The clinical presentation depends on the patient's age.
Children over 1 year and adults
Children under 1 year
The classic signs of meningitis are usually absent.Children 0 to 3 months:
Children ≤ 7 days: Gram-negative bacilli (Klebsiella spp, E. coli, S.
marcescens, Pseudomona spp, Salmonella spp) and group B streptococcus
Children > 7 days: S. pneumoniae accounts for 50% of all bacterial meningitis
Children 3 months-5 years: S. pneumoniae, H. inﬂuenza B and N. meningitidis
Children > 5 years and adults: S. pneumoniae and N. meningitidis
Immunodepressed patients (HIV, malnourished): high percentage of Gram- negative bacilli (specially Salmonella spp)
and also M. tuberculosis.
Sickle cell anaemia: Salmonella spp and Staphylococcus aureus are frequent causes.
Meningitis may be related to S. aureus when associated with skin infection or skull fracture.
Fever, severe headache, photophobia, neck stiffness
Brudzinski's sign (neck ﬂexion in a supine patient results in involuntary ﬂexion of the knees) and Kernig's sign
(attempts to extend the knee from the ﬂexed-thigh position are met with strong passive resistance).
Petechial or ecchymotic purpura (usually in meningococcal infections)
In severe forms: coma, seizures, focal signs, purpura fulminans
The child is irritable, appears sick with fever or hypothermia, poor feeding or vomiting.
Other features include: seizures, apnoea, altered consciousness, bulging fontanelle (when not crying); occasionally,
neck stiffness and purpuric rash.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Laboratory
 
 
Note: in an endemic area, it is essential to test for severe malaria (rapid test or thin/thick ﬁlms).
Treatment in a non-epidemic context
Antibiotic therapy
For the choice of antibiotic therapy and dosages according to age, see table below.
 Lumbar puncture (LP):
Macroscopic examination of CSF: antibiotic therapy should be initiated immediately if the LP yields a turbid CSF.
Microscopic examination: Gram stain (but a negative examination does not exclude the diagnosis) and white
blood cell count (WBC).
In an epidemic context, once the meningococcal aetiology has been conﬁrmed, there is no need for routine LP
for new cases.
  Pressure AspectWBC
(leucocytes/mm)3ProteinOther
tests
Normal CSF   Clear < 5Pandy–
< 40 mg/dl–
Bacterial meningitis ++++ Cloudy, turbid100-20 000 
mainly neutrophiles
In neonates: 
> 20
In
immunocompromised, 
the WBC may be < 100Pandy+
100-500
mg/dlGram stain +
Viral meningitisNormal to
+Clear10-700
mainly lymphocytesPandy– –
TB meningitis +++Clear or
yellowish< 500 
mainly lymphocytesPandy+ AFB
Cryptococcal
meningitis++++ Clear< 800 
mainly lymphocytesPandy– India ink
Rapid test for detection of bacterial antigens.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
  No associated skin infectionAssociated skin infection (including umbilical
cord infection)
  First line Alternative First line Alternative
0 to 7
days
< 2 kgampicillin IV
100 mg/kg every 12 hours
+
cefotaxime IV
50 mg/kg every 12 hoursampicillin IV
100 mg/kg
every 12
hours
+
gentamicin
IV
3 mg/kg
once dailycloxacillin IV
50 mg/kg every 12 hours
+
cefotaxime IV
50 mg/kg every 12 hourscloxacillin
IV
50 mg/kg
every 12
hours
+
gentamicin
IV
3 mg/kg
once daily
0 to 7
days
≥ 2 kgampicillin IV
100 mg/kg every 8 hours
+
cefotaxime IV
50 mg/kg every 8 hoursampicillin IV
100 mg/kg
every 8
hours
+
gentamicin
IV
5 mg/kg
once dailycloxacillin IV
50 mg/kg every 8 hours
+
cefotaxime IV
50 mg/kg every 8 hourscloxacillin
IV
50 mg/kg
every 8
hours
+
gentamicin
IV
5 mg/kg
once daily
8 days
to
< 1
month
≥ 2 kgampicillin IV
100 mg/kg every 8 hours
+
cefotaxime IV
50 mg/kg every 8 hoursampicillin IV
100 mg/kg
every 8
hours
+
gentamicin
IV
5 mg/kg
once dailycloxacillin IV
50 mg/kg every 6 hours
+
cefotaxime IV
50 mg/kg every 8 hourscloxacillin
IV
50 mg/kg
every 6
hours
+
gentamicin
IV
5 mg/kg
once daily
1 to 3
monthsampicillin IV
100 mg/kg every 8 hours
+
ceftriaxone IV 100 mg/kg on D1
then starting on D2: 100 mg/kg once
daily or 50 mg/kg every 12 hoursampicillin IV
100 mg/kg
every 8
hours
+
gentamicin
IV
2.5 mg/kg
every 8
hourscloxacillin IV
50 mg/kg every 6 hours
+
ceftriaxone IV 100 mg/kg on D1
then starting on D2: 100 mg/kg once
daily or 50 mg/kg every 12 hourscloxacillin
IV
50 mg/kg
every 6
hours
+
gentamicin
IV
2.5 mg/kg
every 8
hoursThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Duration of antibiotherapy: 
1) According to the pathogen:
 
2) If the pathogen is unknown:
Additional treatment
Treatment in an epidemic context
Antibiotic therapy
In this context, N. meningitidis is the most likely pathogen.
 > 3
monthsceftriaxone IV
Children: 100 mg/kg on D1 then starting on D2: 100
mg/kg once daily or 50 mg/kg every 12 hours (max.
4 g daily)cloxacillin IV
Children < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
Children ≥ 40 kg: 2 g every 6 hours
+
ceftriaxone IV
Children: 100 mg/kg on D1 then starting on D2: 100
mg/kg once daily or 50 mg/kg every 12 hours (max.
4 g daily)
Adults ceftriaxone IV: 4 g once daily or 2 g every 12 hourscloxacillin IV: 2 g every 6 hours
+
ceftriaxone IV: 4 g once daily or 2 g every 12 hours
Haemophilus inﬂuenzae: 7 days
Streptococcus pneumonia: 10-14 days
Group B streptococcus and Listeria: 14-21 days
Gram-negative bacilli: 21 days
Neisseria meningitidis: see antibiotherapy in an epidemic context
Children < 3 months: 2 weeks beyond the ﬁrst sterile CSF culture or 21 days
Children > 3 months and adults: 10 days. Consider extending treatment or alternative diagnoses if fever persists
beyond 10 days. On the other hand, a 7-day course of ceftriaxone is sufﬁcient in patients who are making an
uncomplicated recovery.
Dexamethasone reduces the risk of hearing loss in patients with H. inﬂuenzae or S. pneumoniae.
Early administration is indicated in meningitis caused by these pathogens or when the pathogen is unknown, except
in neonates (and in presumed meningococcal meningitis in an epidemic context).
dexamethasone IV
Children > 1 month: 0.15 mg/kg (max. 10 mg) every 6 hours for 2 to 4 days
Adults: 10 mg every 6 hours for 2 to 4 days
The treatment should be started before or with the ﬁrst dose of antibiotic, otherwise, the treatment offers no
beneﬁt. [1] [2] 
Ensure that the patient is well fed and well hydrated (infusions or nasogastric tube if necessary).
Seizures (Chapter 1).
Coma: prevention of bed sores, care of the mouth and eyes, etc.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Note:
A short treatment with a single dose of ceftriaxone IM can be used in children 2 years and older and in adults during a
meningococcal meningitis epidemic if 1) conﬁrmed by a reliable laboratory 2) the number of cases exceeds
management capacities with the 5-day treatment. Check national recommendations. Nevertheless, it is essential to
ensure a monitoring of cases after 24 hours.
ceftriaxone IM
Children 2 to < 12 years: 100 mg/kg single dose
Children ≥ 12 years and adults: 4 g single dose
If there is no clinical improvement (fever > 38.5 °C, repeated seizures, appearance or aggravation of a reduced level of
consciousness or of neurological signs) 24 hours after the injection, continue the treatment with ceftriaxone for 5 days.
Additional treatment
 
ReferencesAge Treatment [3]
Children
< 2 monthsceftriaxone IVor IM for 7 days
100 mg/kg once daily  (a)   (b) 
Children ≥ 2 months
and adultsceftriaxone IVor IM or 5 days
Children 2 months to < 5 years: 100 mg/kg once daily (max. 2 g daily)
Children ≥ 5 years and adults: 2 g once daily (a)   (b) 
(a)The solvent of ceftriaxone for IM injection contains lidocaine. Ceftriaxone reconstituted using this solvent must never be
administered by IV route. For IV administration, water for injection must always be used.
(b)For IM administration, divide the dose into 2 injections if needed, half-dose in each buttock.
 a 
Ensure that the patient is well fed and well hydrated (infusions or nasogastric tube if necessary).
Seizures (Chapter 1).
Coma: prevention of bed sores, care of the mouth and eyes, etc.
Dexamethasone in not indicated.
Footnotes
(a)For IM administration, divide the dose into 2 injections if needed, half-dose in each buttock.
1.D. van de Beek, C. Cabellos, O. Dzupova, S. Esposito, M. Klein, A. T. Kloek, S. L. Leib, B. Mourvillier, C. Ostergaard, P. Pagliano,
H.W. Pﬁster, R. C. Read, O. Resat Sipahi, M.C. Brouwer. ESCMID guideline: diagnosis and treatment of acute bacterial
meningitis, 2016.
https://www.clinicalmicrobiologyandinfection.com/article/S1198-743X(16)00020-3/pdf
2.Sheldon L Kaplan, MD. Bacterial meningitis in children: Dexamethasone and other measures to prevent neurologic
complications. UpToDate [Accessed 25 February 2019].
3.World Health Organization. Managing meningitis epidemics in Africa. A quick reference guide for health authorities and
health-care workers. 2015.
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/154595/WHO_HSE_GAR_ERI_2010.4_Rev1_eng.pdf?sequence=1This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Tetanus
Last updated: August 2022
 
Tetanus is a severe infection due to the bacillus Clostridium tetani, found in soil, and human and animal waste. The
infection is noncontagious.
Clostridium tetani is introduced into the body through a wound and produces a toxin whose action on the central
nervous system is responsible for the symptoms of tetanus.
Tetanus is entirely preventable by vaccination. It occurs in people who have not been fully vaccinated before exposure
or have not received adequate post-exposure prophylaxis. In these individuals, most breaks in the skin or mucous
membranes carry a risk of tetanus, but the wounds with the greatest risk are: the stump of the umbilical cord in
neonates, puncture wounds, wounds with tissue loss or contamination with foreign material or soil, avulsion and crush
injuries, sites of non-sterile injections, chronic wounds (e.g. lower extremity ulcers), burns and bites. Surgical or
obstetrical procedures performed under non-sterile conditions also carry a risk of tetanus.
Clinical features
Generalised tetanus is the most frequent and severe form of the infection. It presents as muscular rigidity, which
progresses rapidly to involve the entire body, and muscle spasms, which are very painful. Level of consciousness is not
altered.
Children and adults
Neonates
Treatment
Hospitalisation is needed and usually lasts 3 to 4 weeks. Correct management can reduce mortality even in hospitals
with limited resources.
General measuresAverage time from exposure to onset of symptoms is 7 days (3 to 21 days).
Muscular rigidity begins in the jaw muscles (difﬁculty with then inability to open mouth [trismus] preventing the patient
from speaking, eating), spreading to the face (ﬁxed smile), neck (difﬁculty with swallowing), to the trunk (restriction
of respiratory muscles; hyperextension of spine [opisthotonus]), to the abdomen (guarding) and to the limbs (ﬂexion
of the upper limbs and extension of the lower limbs).
Muscle spasms, which are very painful, appear at the onset or when muscular rigidity becomes generalised. They
are triggered by stimuli (noise, light, touch) or arise spontaneously. Spasms of the thoracic and laryngeal muscles
may cause respiratory distress or aspiration.
In 90% of cases, initial symptoms appear within 3 to 14 days of birth.
The ﬁrst signs are signiﬁcant irritability and difﬁculty sucking (rigidity of the lips, trismus) then rigidity becomes
generalised, as in adults. Any neonate, who initially sucked and cried normally, presenting with irritability and difﬁculty
sucking 3 to 28 days after birth and demonstrating rigidity and muscle spasms should be assumed to have neonatal
tetanus.
Ensure intensive nursing care.
The patient should be in a dark, quiet room. Blindfold neonates with a cloth bandage.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Neutralisation of toxin
human tetanus immunoglobulin IM
Neonates, children and adults: 500 IU single dose, injected into 2 separate sites
Inhibition of toxin production
metronidazoleIV infusion (30 minutes; 60 minutes in neonates) for 7 days
Control of rigidity and spasms, and sedation of the patient
Diazepam should decrease the frequency and intensity of spams without causing respiratory depression. The dose and
frequency of administration depend on the patient’s clinical response and tolerance.
 
 Handle the patient carefully, while sedated and as little as possible; change position every 3 to 4 hours to avoid
bedsores.
Teach family the danger signs and instruct them to call the nurse for the slightest respiratory symptom (cough,
difﬁculty breathing, apnoea, excessive secretions, cyanosis, etc.).
Establish IV access for hydration, IV injections.
Gentle suction of secretions (mouth, oropharynx).
Insert a nasogastric tube for hydration, feeding and administration of oral medications.
Provide hydration and nutrition in feeds divided over 24 hours. In neonates, give expressed breast milk every 3 hours
(risk of hypoglycaemia).
  a 
Neonates:
0 to 7 days: 15 mg/kg on D1 then, after 24 hours, 7.5 mg/kg every 12 hours
8 days to < 1 month (< 2 kg): same doses
8 days to < 1 month (≥ 2 kg): 15 mg/kg every 12 hours
Children 1 month and over: 10 mg/kg every 8 hours (max. 1500 mg daily)
Adults: 500 mg every 8 hours
 
 
There is a high risk of respiratory depression and hypotension when using diazepam, especially in children and
elderly patients. Constant and close monitoring of the patient‘s respiratory rate (RR) and oxygen saturation
(SpO) is essential, with immediate availability of equipment for manual ventilation (Ambu bag, face mask) and
intubation, suction (electric if possible) and Ringer lactate.2
A continuous IV infusion of diazepam requires the use of a dedicated vein (no other infusion/injection in this
vein); avoid the antecubital fossa if possible.
Do not stop treatment abruptly; an abrupt stop can cause spasms.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Count the volume of the infusion of diazepam as part of the patient’s daily ﬂuid intake.
 Neonates diazepam emulsion for injection (10 mg ampoule, 5 mg/ml, 2 ml)
 
Example:
Neonate weighing 3 kg (administration by electric syringe)
0.1 mg/kg/hour x 3 kg = 0.3 mg/hour
Dilute one 10 mg ampoule of diazepam emulsion for injection in 50 ml of 10% glucose to obtain a
solution containing 0.2 mg of diazepam per ml.
Administer 1.5 ml/hour [dose (in mg/hour) ÷ dilution (in mg/ml) = dose in ml/hour i.e. 0.3 (mg/hour) ÷ 0.2
(mg/ml) = 1.5 ml/hour].
 
If an electric syringe is not available, diluting the diazepam emulsion in an infusion bag for continuous
infusion may be considered. Weigh the risks associated with this mode of administration (accidental
bolus or insufﬁcient dose). The infusion should be monitored closely to avoid any change, however
small, of the prescribed rate.0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg by slow IV injection (3 to 5 minutes) every 1 to 4 hours depending on the severity
and the persistence of the spasms as long as the RR is ≥ 30.
If despite hourly diazepam the spasms persist, start a continuous infusion of diazepam with an
electric syringe: 0.1 to 0.5 mg/kg/hour (2.4 to 12 mg/kg every 24 hours). Start with 0.1 mg/kg/hour
and if symptoms persist, increase by 0.1 mg/kg/hour as long as RR is ≥ 30.
If in spite of 0.5 mg/kg/hour symptoms persist, the dose can be increased up to 0.8 mg/kg/hour as
long as the RR ≥ 30.
Diluted diazepam emulsion does not keep for more than 6 hours.
Children
> 1
month
and
adultsSame doses and protocol as in neonates but:
 
Examples:Use diazepam solution for injection 5 mg/ml: (10 mg ampoule, 5 mg/ml, 2 ml). (a)
These doses can be administered as long as the RR is:
≥ 30 in children under 1 year
≥ 25 in children 1 to 4 years
≥ 20 in children 5 to 12 years
≥ 14 in children over 12 years
≥ 12 in adults
Child weighing 6 kg (continuous IV infusion using a pediatric infusion set; 1 ml = 60 drops)
0.1 mg/kg/hour x 6 kg = 0.6 mg/hour
Dilute one 10 mg ampoule of diazepam solution for injection in 50 ml of 5% glucose (10%
glucose if child < 3 months) to obtain a solution containing 0.2 mg of diazepam per ml.
Administer 3 ml/hour [dose (in mg/hour) ÷ dilution (in mg/ml) = dose in ml/hour i.e. 0.6 (mg/hour) ÷ 0.2
(mg/ml) = 3 ml/hour] or 3 drops/minute (in a paediatric infusion set ml/hour = drops/minute).
Adult weighing 60 kg (standard adult infusion set, 1 ml = 20 drops)
0.1 mg/kg/hour x 60 kg = 6 mg/hour
Dilute 5 ampoules of 10 mg of diazepam solution (50 mg) in 250 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or
5% glucose to obtain a solution containing 0.2 mg of diazepam per ml.
Administer 30 ml/hour [dose (in mg/hour) ÷ dilution (in mg/ml) = dose in ml/hour e.g. 6 (mg/hour) ÷ 0.5
(mg/ml) = 30 ml/hour] or 10 drops/minute.
(a)Administer the ﬁrst dose rectally if an IV cannot be placed immediately.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
When the frequency and severity of the spasms have decreased, start weaning the diazepam (gradually decrease the
rate of infusion):
 
Notes:
Treatment of pain
morphine PO (via nasogastric tube) if necessary (see Pain, Chapter 1).
When morphine is administered with diazepam the risk of respiratory depression is increased, thus closer monitoring is
required. When morphine is no longer required, wean the same way as diazepam.
Treatment of the entry point and associated infections
Tetanus vaccination
As tetanus does not confer immunity, vaccination against tetanus must be administered once the patient has
recovered.
In case of neonatal tetanus, initiate the vaccination of the mother.
Prevention
Of critical importance, given the difﬁculty of treating tetanus once established.
1) Post-exposure prophylaxisCalculate the total daily dose of IV diazepam and administer it orally in 4 divided doses, 6 hours apart, via
nasogastric (NG)tube.  b  
Give ﬁrst NG dose and decrease rate of IV infusion by 50%.
Give second NG dose and stop IV diazepam infusion.
If withdrawal signsappear, wean more slowly.  c 
Once on diazepam PO, wean by 10 to 20% of the original dose daily, until at a dose of 0.05 mg/kg every 6 hours.
Then increase the interval from every 6 hours to every 8 hours for 24 hours as tolerated (wean more slowly if
withdrawal signs appear).
Continue to increase the interval between the doses from every 8 hours to every 12 hours and then to every 24
hours before stopping the diazepam.
Each step should be for 24 hours or more if withdrawal signs appear.
It is often at these smaller doses that it is difﬁcult to wean diazepam. If this is the case, slow the wean further:
dropping the % wean (e.g. 5% wean every 24 hours instead of 10% wean) or increasing the interval between weans
(e.g. going from every 24 hours to every 48 hours).
If the patient is also receiving morphine, wean diazepam ﬁrst then, wean morphine.
Non-pharmacological measures to reduce withdrawal: reduce environmental stimuli; swaddle infants, frequent
feedings.
Infants who have had tetanus remain hypertonic, even when they are no longer having spams.
Search systematically the entry wound. Provide local treatment under sedation: cleansing and for deep wounds,
irrigation and debridement.
Cord infection: do not excise or debride; treat bacterial omphalitis and sepsis, add to metronidazole IV: cloxacillin IV
+ cefotaxime IV or cloxacillin IV + gentamicin IV (for doses, see Bacterial meningitis).
In all cases:
Cleansing and disinfection of the wound, and removal of any foreign body.
Antibiotics are not prescribed routinely for prophylaxis. The decision to administer an antibiotic (metronidazole
or penicillin) is made on a case-by-case basis, according to the patient’s clinical status.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 
tetanus vaccine IM
Children and adults: 0.5 ml per dose
If no vaccination or unknown vaccination status: administer at least 2 doses at an interval of 4 weeks.
If incomplete vaccination: administer one dose.
Then, to ensure long-lasting protection, administer additional doses to complete a total of 5 doses, as indicated in
the table below.
 
human anti-tetanus immunoglobulin IM
Children and adults: 250 IU single dose; 500 IU for wounds more than 24 hours old.
Inject the vaccine and the immunoglobulin in 2 different sites, using a separate syringe for each.
2) Routine vaccination (pre-exposure prophylaxis)Depending on pre-exposure vaccination status:
Tetanus vaccine (TV) and immunoglobulin: see indications below.  d 
Type of woundComplete vaccination (3 or more doses) 
Time since administration of last dose:Incomplete vaccination 
(less than 3 doses) 
or no vaccination
or unknown status < 5 years 5-10 years > 10 years
Minor, clean None NoneTV
1 booster
doseInitiate or complete TV
Other NoneTV 
1 booster doseTV
1 booster
doseInitiate or complete TV
and administer tetanus immunoglobulin
Children: 6 doses in total: a ﬁrst series of 3 doses of DTP or DTP + HepB or DTP + HepB + Hib before the age of
1 year, administered at an interval of 1 month (e.g. at the age of 6, 10 and 14 weeks), then a dose of a vaccine
containing tetanus toxoid between the age of 12 and 23 months, a dose between the age of 4 to 7 years, then a
dose between the age of 12 and 15 years.
Women of childbearing age: 5 doses during the reproductive years: a series of 3 doses of Td with an interval of at
least one month between the ﬁrst and second dose and an interval of at least 6 months between the second and
third dose, then two other doses, each at minimum interval of one year, e.g. during pregnancies (see table below).
Pregnant women: if a woman has never been vaccinated or if her vaccination status is unknown: 2 doses of
Tdduring the pregnancy to reduce the risk of tetanus in mother and  neonate: the ﬁrst as soon as possible during
the pregnancy and the second at least 4 weeks later and at least 2 weeks before delivery. This vaccination
schedule protects more than 80% of neonates from tetanus. A single dose offers no protection 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 Dose Vaccination schedule in adults Degree and duration of protection
TV1On ﬁrst contact with the health care system
or as soon as possible during pregnancyNo protection
TV2 At least 4 weeks after TV180% 
1 to 3 years
TV36 months to 1 year after TV2
or during the following pregnancy95% 
5 years
TV41 to 5 years after TV3
or during the following pregnancy99% 
10 years
TV51 to 10 years after TV4
or during the following pregnancy99% 
Throughout the reproductive years
Footnotes
(a)Clindamycin IV for 7 days is an alternative (for doses, see Periorbital and orbital cellulitis, Chapter 5).
(b)Administration of oral diazepam tablets to infants: calculate the exact dose of diazepam, e.g. to obtain 0.5 mg of diazepam,
cut a scored diazepam 2 mg tablet in half along scoring then split in half again. Crush quarter tablet and dissolve in
expressed breast milk or infant formula.
(c)Withdrawal signs: excessive irritability, tremors, increased muscle tone, frequent yawning, poor feeding, watery stools and
sweating.
(d)Tetanus-containing vaccine, such as Td or DTP or DTP + HepB or DTP + HepB + Hib according to availability and patient’s
age.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Enteric (typhoid and paratyphoid) fevers
Last updated: September 2022
 
 
Enteric fevers include typhoid fever, due to Salmonella enterica serotype Typhi (S. Typhi) and paratyphoid fever, due
to Salmonella enterica serotype Paratyphi A, B or C (S. Paratyphi).
Enteric fevers are acquired by the ingestion of water or food contaminated with excreta of symptomatic or
asymptomatic carriers or by direct contact (dirty hands).
Enteric fevers are endemic in South, Central and Southeast Asia, sub-saharan Africa, Oceania and, to a lesser extent, in
Latin America.
Effective treatment signiﬁcantly reduces the risk of complications and death.
Clinical features
Clinical manifestations of typhoid and paratyphoid fevers are the same. Enteric fevers have insidious onset and vary
from mild to severe. 
 
Clinical diagnosis is difﬁcult as enteric fevers resembles other infections present in regions where they are
endemic. The main differential diagnoses are: malaria, brucellosis, leptospirosis, typhus, rickettsiosis,
sepsis and dengue.
Laboratory
Treatment
In all casesThe characteristic sign is prolonged fever, which gradually increases during the ﬁrst week, plateaus the second
week then decreases between the third and fourth week.  
Non-speciﬁc signs and symptoms are frequently associated: gastrointestinal disturbances (abdominal pain,
constipation or diarrhoea, vomiting), headache, malaise, chills, fatigue, non productive cough and/or
hepatosplenomegaly. 
Erythematous maculopapular rash on the trunk extreme fatigue and/or relative bradycardia (heart rate-temperature
dissociation) may be present.
Serious complications affect about 27% of hospitalised patientsand usually occur during the second or third
week of illness. These may incude decreased level of consciousness, intestinal haemorrhage or perforation
or peritonitis, shock, or nephritis. In pregnant women, severe infection may lead to foetal complications
(miscarriage, preterm delivery, intrauterine death). [1] 
Relapse may occur 2 to 3 weeks after recovery. It is usually not due to antibiotic resistance, and re-treatment is
required.
Culture of S. Typhi or Paratyphi and drug susceptibility test (blood and stool specimens).
In all cases, rapid test for malaria in endemic regions (and antimalarial treatment if needed, see Malaria, Chapter 6). 
Widal agglutination test, other serologic tests, and rapid diagnostic tests are not recommended (low sensitivity and
speciﬁcity). 
Hydrate and treat fever (Chapter 1). Fever usually resolves 4 to 5 days after starting effective antibiotic treatment.
Choice of antibiotic treatment depends on the susceptibility of the strain, or when susceptibility is unknown, on
recent data on susceptibility of strains in the region. Check national recommendations. For information:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Uncomplicated cases (outpatients)
Uncomplicated cases (the vast majority of cases) can be treated with an oral antibiotic treatment.
Severe cases (inpatients)
These cases should be treated under close monitoring. Antibiotic treatment is initially parenteral, then oral when
there is decreasing fever, clinical improvement and the patient can tolerate oral treatment.
Additional measures
PreventionStrains resistant to chloramphenicol, ampicillin/amoxicillin and co-trimoxazole (multidrug-resistant, MDR
strains) are present in most parts of the world. 
Ciproﬂoxacin is used as ﬁrst-line treatment in some countries, however ﬂuoroquinolone resistance is endemic in
Asia and is increasing in several parts of the world. [2] 
Ceftriaxone resistance has been identiﬁed in several regions. [2] 
MDR strains also resistant to ﬂuoroquinolones and third-generation cephalosporins (extensively drug-resistant,
XDR strains) have developed.    [3] 
First-line antibiotics:
azithromycin PO for 7 days (including for MDR and XDR cases, and pregnant women)
Children: 10 to 20 mg/kg (max. 1 g) once daily 
Adults: 500 mg to 1 g once daily or 1 g on D1 then 500 mg once daily
or
ceﬁxime PO for 10 to 14 days (except for third-generation cephalosporin resistance and XDR cases)
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 200 mg) 2 times daily
Adults: 200 mg 2 times daily
Alternatives include, only if recent data show susceptibility of strains to these antibiotics in the region:
amoxicillin PO for 14 days
Children: 30 mg/kg (max. 1 g) 3 times daily 
Adults: 1 g 3 times daily 
or
co-trimoxazole PO for 14 days
Children: 20 mg SMX + 4 mg TMP/kg (max. 800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP) 2 times daily 
Adults: 800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP 2 times daily
Severe cases include:
toxic appearance or decreased level of consciousness or medical or surgical complication;
oral administration not possible due to persistent vomiting.
Start with ceftriaxone IV(including for pregnant women)
Children: 50 to 100 mg/kg (max. 4 g) once daily
Adults: 2 g once daily or 2 times daily
Then change to azithromycin PO (as above) to complete at least 7 days of treatment. a 
For suspected or conﬁrmed ceftriaxone resistance or XDR stains, use meropenem IV, including for pregnant
women, then change to azithromycin PO to complete at least 7 days of treatment.
In case of decreased level of consciousness or shock, dexamethasone IV: 3 mg/kg then 1 mg/kg every 6 hours for
2 days (total of 8 doses)   
Treat in intensive care unit patients with shock, signiﬁcant intestinal haemorrhage or suspected
perforation/peritonitis. If suspected perforation/peritonitis, get urgent surgical review and add metronidazole to
ceftriaxone for anaerobic bacterial coverage. b This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
ReferencesHygiene measures common to all diarrhoeas: handwashing; consumption of treated water (chlorinated, boiled,
bottled, etc.); washing/cooking of food, etc.
In hospitals: for patients with watery diarrhoea, consider disinfection of excreta with chlorinated solution, if stools
are collected in buckets.
Vaccination with the typhoid conjugate vaccine in endemic regions. This vaccine can be used to control typhoid
outbreaks. It does not protect against paratyphoid fever. c 
Footnotes
(a)The solvent of ceftriaxone for IM injection contains lidocaine. Ceftriaxone reconstituted using this solvent must NEVER be
administered by IV route. For IV administration, water for injection must always be used.
(b)Do not add metronidazole if the patient receives meropenem (meropenem already covers anaerobic bacteria).
(c)For more information, see Typhoid vaccines: WHO position paper:
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/272272/WER9313.pdf?ua=1
1.Cruz Espinoza LM, McCreedy E, Holm M, et al. Occurrence of typhoid fever complications and their relation to duration of
illness preceding hospitalization: a systematic literature review and meta-analysis. Clin Infect Dis 2019;69(Suppl 6):S435-48.
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6821330/ [Accessed 28 June 2022]
2.Browne AJ, Hamadani BHK, Kumaran EAP, Rao P, et al. Drug-resistant enteric fever worldwide, 1990 to 2018: a systematic
review and meta-analysis. BMC Medicine 2020;18:1+22.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12916-019-1443-1 [Accessed 23 February 2022]
3.Klemm EJ, Shakoor S, Page AJ, Qamar FN, et al. Emergence of an Extensively Drug-Resistant Salmonella enterica Serovar
Typhi Clone Harboring a Promiscuous Plasmid Encoding Resistance to Fluoroquinolones and Third-Generation
Cephalosporins. mBio. 2018 Jan-Feb; 9(1): e00105-18. https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5821095/ [Accessed 26
June 2022]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Brucellosis
Last updated: September 2022
 
Brucellosis is a zoonosis that mainly affects livestock animals. 
 
The main routes of transmission to humans are: 
 
Brucellosis is caused by bacteria of the genus Brucella, particularly B. melitensis (sheep and goats), B.
abortus (cattle), B. suis (pigs).
 
The disease is found worldwide and mainly in rural areas. 
After primary infection relapses may occur (5 to 15% of cases, even months after end of initial treatment) or the
infection may become chronic.
Clinical features
Acute form (primary infection)
 
Diagnosis is difﬁcult because of the broad spectrum of ﬂuctuating and non-speciﬁc clinical manifestations. In patients
with unexplained fever, brucellosis should be considered when risk factors are present: consumption of unpasteurized
milk products; exposure to livestock (e.g. livestock farmers, veterinarians, butchers, slaughterhouse workers).
Localised form 
Primary infection may progress to localised infection (even several months or years later), mainly:
Paraclinical investigations
Laboratorydigestive, by ingestion of unpasteurized milk (or unpasteurized milk products) from an infected animal;
cutaneous, by direct contact with infected animals or carcasses of infected animals. 
Remittent or intermittent fever (39-40 °C), associated with several signs or symptoms: chills, night sweats, joint and
muscle pain, weight loss, fatigue, malaise, headache; adenopathies (particularly in children).
May be associated with: non-speciﬁc gastrointestinal disorders, cough, hepato and/or splenomegaly, arthritis
(knee), orchitis.
osteoarticular: sacroiliac joint and often particularly lower limbs joints;  spine (intervertebral disk infection, vertebral
osteomyelitis)
genito-urinary: orchitis, epididymitis 
pulmonary: bronchitis, pneumonia, pleurisy 
neurological : meningitis, encephalitis, polyneuritis
Blood culture is the gold standard for diagnosis. It is positive only in the acute phase. The bacteria grow slowly (7 to
21 days).
Serological tests (Rose Bengal, Wright agglutination test, indirect immunoﬂuorescence, ELISA, etc.) provide
presumptive diagnoses.
In the event of neurological signs or meningitis, lumbar puncture shows clear cerebrospinal ﬂuid (CSF) that may
contain high white blood cell count; high protein concentration in CSF; low CSF glucose.
Rule out malaria in endemic regions (rapid test).
Exclude tuberculosis if cough > 2 weeks (sputum smear microscopy).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Radiography 
Treatment
Check national recommendations on antibiotic therapy. For information:
 
co-trimoxazole PO for 6 weeks
Children < 8 years: 20 mg SMX + 4 mg TMP/kg (max. 800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP) 2 times daily
 
doxycycline PO for 6 weeks 
Children ≥ 8 years and < 45 kg: 2 to 2.2 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily
Children ≥ 45 kg and adults: 100 mg 2 times daily
  
rifampicin PO for 6 weeks
Children: 15 to 20 mg/kg (max. 600 mg) once daily
Adults: 600 to 900 mg once daily
 
gentamicin IM for 2 weeks
Children and adults: 5 mg/kg once daily
 
streptomycin IM for 2 weeks
Adults: 1 g once daily
 
For localised forms of the infection, same treatment but for a period of 6 weeks to 4 months depending on the focus.
PreventionJoint pain (hips, knees, ankles, vertebrae, sacroiliac joint): small erosions or destruction or joint space narrowing.
Often involves the spine, particularly the lumbar spine, causing spondylodiskitis.
Pulmonary signs: chest x-ray often normal. There may be consolidation, nodules, lymphadenopathy, or pleural
effusion.
 Children under 8 yearsco-trimoxazole + rifampicin
or co-trimoxazole + gentamicin
Children 8 years and overdoxycycline + rifampicin
or doxycycline + gentamicin
Adultsdoxycycline + rifampicin
or doxycycline + streptomycin or gentamicin
Pregnant/breast-feeding women rifampicin
Washing of hands and clothing if in contact with animals.
Boil milk, avoid ingestion of unpasteurized milk products, cook offal thoroughly.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Plague
Last updated: September 2022
 
 
Plague is a zoonosis caused by the Gram-negative bacillus Yersinia pestis that affects many wild and domestic
mammals, particularly rodents.
Plague is transmitted to man by infected animals (direct contact or inhalation of their respiratory secretions), the bite
of a ﬂea of infected animals, or inhalation of respiratory secretions of individuals with pneumonic plague.
Natural foci of infection include Africa, Asia, North and South America, and parts of Europe.
 
Bubonic plague is the most common form, usually resulting from the bite of an infected ﬂea. Without prompt
treatment, the bacteria may be disseminated by haematogenous route, producing a more severe form (see below) with
a high mortality rate.
The following forms of plague may be primary or secondary to bubonic plague:
Clinical features 
See table below.
 
Main differential diagnoses include:
Laboratory
ManagementPneumonic plague can rapidly progress to respiratory distress, shock, and death without prompt treatment.
Septicaemic plague is a fulminant illness that can progress to disseminated intravascular coagulation, respiratory
distress, shock, and death.
Plague meningitis is a rare but very severe form of plague.
Other causes of lymphadenitis (e.g. some bacterial skin infections, tularemia, lymphogranuloma
venereum, chancroid)
Acute pneumonia (Chapter 2)
Other causes of septicaemia (see Shock, Chapter 1) or meningitis (see Bacterial meningitis, Chapter 7)
Collect pre-treatment specimens: lymph node aspirate (bubonic plague), sputum (pneumonic plague), blood
(septicaemic plague), or cerebrospinal ﬂuid (plague meningitis).
Send specimensto reference laboratory for:  a 
Rapid diagnostic test for detection of F1 capsular antigen of Y. pestis
PCR 
Culture of Y. pestis and drug suceptibility test
In all cases, rapid test for malaria in endemic regions (and antimalarial treatment if needed, see Malaria, Chapter 6).
Start empiric antibiotic treatment for 10 to 14 days as soon as plague is suspected, before results of diagnosis
tests are available. 
A combination of 2 antibiotics from different classes is recommended in severe disease, plague meningitis, and
pregnant women.
Follow national recommendations according to antibiotic resistance patterns if known. For information: see table
below.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment of suspected cases
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Forms of plague Clinical features Antibiotic treatment [1]
Bubonic
AND Fever, chills, malaise,
headache 
Lymph node (bubo), painful,
usually inguinal, (one or
more) Children (including < 8 years) and adults:
doxycycline PO:
or
gentamicin IM or IV:
or
ciproﬂoxacin PO:Under 45 kg: 4.4 mg/kg (max. 200 mg) on D1, then
2.2 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily
45 kg and over: 200 mg on D1, then 100 mg 2 times
daily
 (a)
Children: 4.5 to 7.5 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 5 mg/kg once daily
Children: 15 mg/kg 2 to 3 times daily (max. 750 mg 2
times daily or 500 mg 3 times daily)
Adults: 750 mg 2 times daily
Pneumonic
AND  Fever, chills, malaise,
headache 
Dyspnea, chest pain,
productive cough with
purulent or blood-stained
sputum 
Respiratory distress or
failure and sepsis in severe
or advanced, untreated
diseaseChildren and adults:
 
If mild disease:
gentamicin IM or IV(as above)
or
ciproﬂoxacin PO (as above) or IV
 
If severe disease:
gentamicin + ciproﬂoxacin (as above)
or, if not available, gentamicin + doxycycline (as
above)
 
After clinical improvement, change to ciproﬂoxacin or
doxycycline PO (as above). (a) 
 (b)
Septicaemic Frequently no localizing
symptoms or signs
Gastrointestinal
disturbances (abdominal
pain, vomiting, diarrhoea,
etc.) often presentAs severe pneumonic plague
Meningitis (c)Signs of meningitis. Children and adults:
chloramphenicol IV:
+ ciproﬂoxacin PO or IV (as above)
or, if not available,
gentamicin + ciproﬂoxacin (as above)Children 1 to 12 years: 25 mg/kg (max. 1 g) every 8
hours  
Children 13 years and over and adults: 1 g every 8
hoursThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment in pregnant women
Infection prevention and control (in hospitals)
Post-exposure prophylaxis of contacts
In the event of contact (distance less than 2 meters without appropriate personal protective equipment) with a
pneumonic plague patient or direct contact with infected body ﬂuids or tissues of any plague patient and within one
week after the end of exposure:
doxycycline PO for 7 days
Children: 2.2 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily
Adults (including pregnant women): 100 mg 2 times daily
or
ciproﬂoxacin PO for 7 days
Children: 20 mg/kg (max. 750 mg) 2 times daily
Adults: 500 to 750 mg 2 times daily 
Pregnant women: 500 mg 3 times daily
Prevention
 (a)Streptomycin IM may be an alternative to gentamicin (except in pregnant women):
Children: 15 mg/kg (max. 1 g) every 12 hours
Adults: 1 g every 12 hours
(b)Use ciproﬂoxacin IV when oral route is not possible:
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 400 mg) every 8 or 12 hours
Adults: 400 mg every 8 hours
(c)If plague meningitis develops, add chloramphenicol to the existing regimen, and continue the combined regimen for an
additional 10 days.
Bubonic, pneumonic, and septicaemic plague: gentamicin IM or IV (as above) + ciproﬂoxacin PO (500 mg 3 times
daily) or IV (as above)
Plague meningitis: chloramphenicol IV + ciproﬂoxacin PO (500 mg 3 times daily) or IV (as above)  
Bubonic plague: no isolation, standard precautions (handwashing, gowns, gloves, eye protection, etc.) with respect
to lymph node aspiration or discharge and other body ﬂuids.
Pneumonic plague: isolation (in single room if possible), standard precautions, plus, for 48 hours after the start of
antibiotic treatment, droplet precautions (medical mask for healthcare workers and for patients during
contact). Only for aerosol-generating procedures, airborne precautions (FFP2 or N95 respirators) for health
workers exposed to aerosols.
Elimination of ﬂeas (e.g. bedding, clothing, corpse): refer to the guide Public health engineering, MSF.
Flea vector control, sanitation and rodent reservoir control, refer to the guide Public health engineering, MSF.
Vaccination against plague is indicated for laboratory technicians handling rodents or working with Y. pestis and is
not a method for controlling an epidemic.
Footnotes
(a)Transportation of specimens in 0.9% sodium chloride requires a cold chain (failing that, a temperature below 30 °C), triple
packaging and UN3373 label.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
References
1.Nelson CA, Meaney-Delman D, Fleck-Derderian S, Cooley KM, et al. Antimicrobial treatment and prophylaxis of plague:
recommendations for naturally acquired infection and bioterrorism response. MMWR Recomm Rep 2021;70(No. RR-3):1-27.
https://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/volumes/70/rr/rr7003a1.htm?s_cid=rr7003a1_w [Accessed 25 January 2022]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Leptospirosis
Last update: October 2022
 
 
Leptospirosis is a zoonosis that affects many domestic and wild animals, mainly rodents (particularly rats) but also
dogs and cattle, etc.
 
It is transmitted to humans by contact through skin lesions or mucous membranes (e.g. eyes, mouth) with:
 
It is caused by bacteria (spirochetes) of the genus Leptospira.
 
Leptospirosis occurs worldwide, particularly in tropical and subtropical regions. There are often outbreaks after heavy
rainfall or ﬂooding.
Clinical features
Approximately 90% of cases are asymptomatic or mild with a favourable outcome. 5 to 15% of cases present a
severe form with multiple organ dysfunction and a high mortality rate without prompt treatment.
Mild form 
Severe or ictero-haemorrhagic form 
The onset is the same but a few days later the symptoms worsen: renal disorders (oliguria or polyuria), hepatic disorder
(jaundice), widespread haemorrhages (purpura, ecchymoses, epistaxis, haemoptysis, etc.), pulmonary signs (chest pain)
or cardiac signs (myocarditis, pericarditis).
 
 
Other conditions to consider include a wide range of acute febrile illnesses, e.g.:  freshwater or moist soil contaminated with urine of an infected animal (indirect contact);
urine, blood and other body ﬂuids or tissues of an infected animal (direct contact).
Acute phase (septicaemic): 
Sudden onset of high fever with chills, headache, myalgia (especially calf and lumbar pain), photophobia, ocular
pain. Bilateral conjunctival suffusion affecting the bulbar conjunctiva (redness without discharge) is a
characteristic sign, but not always present.
May be associated with: gastrointestinal symptoms (anorexia, abdominal pain, nausea, vomiting), non-
productive cough, lymphadenopathy, hepatomegaly, and sometimes, skin rash.
Immune phase:
The signs of the acute phase regress after 5 to 7 days then reappear for a few days usually in a milder form
(milder fever, less severe myalgia) then disappear. 
Signs of meningitis (thought to be of immune origin) are however very common during this phase.
Diagnosis is difﬁcult because of the broad spectrum of clinical manifestations. Patients that present the following
should be considered as suspected cases of leptospirosis:
and [1] 
abrupt onset of fever, chills, conjunctival suffusion, headache, myalgia and jaundice
one or more risk factors for infection: exposure to contaminated freshwater (e.g. swimming, ﬁshing, rice ﬁelds,
ﬂooding) or infected animals (e.g. crop and livestock farmers, veterinarians, butchers and slaughterhouse
workers).
Viral haemorrhagic fevers, dengue, chikungunya, Zika, inﬂuenza, measles, viral hepatitis, other causes of meningitisThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Laboratory
Diagnosis
Other investigations
(if available)
Treatment
Start empiric antibiotic treatment as soon as leptospirosis suspected, before results of diagnosis tests are available.
Mild form (outpatients)
Symptomatic treatment
 
Antibiotic treatment
Children under 45 kg: 2 to 2.2 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily
Children 45 kg and over and adults: 100 mg 2 times daily
or, particularly in pregnant women:
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 500 mg) on D1 then 5 mg/kg (max. 250 mg) once daily on D2 and D3
Adults : 1 g on D1 then 500 mg once daily on D2 and D3 
or, if not available,
Children: 25 mg/kg (max. 1 g) 2 times daily 
Adults: 1 g 2 times daily
 
Antibiotic treatment can trigger a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (high fever, chills, fall in blood pressure and
sometimes shock). It is recommended to monitor the patient for 2 hours after the ﬁrst dose of antibiotic for
occurrence and management of severe Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (symptomatic treatment of shock). 
Severe form (inpatients)
Symptomatic treatmentMalaria
Typhoid fever, brucellosis, rickettsioses
Collect pre-treatment specimens and send them to reference laboratory:
Acute phase (ﬁrst week of illness): blood and/or serum for IgM screening, PCR, and acute specimen for
microscopic agglutination test (MAT);
Immune phase (second week of illness): serum for IgM screening and convalescent specimen for MAT, and urine
for PCR.
In all cases, rapid test for malaria in endemic regions (and antimalarial treatment if needed, see Malaria, Chapter 6).
Serum creatinine: elevated if renal dysfunction.
Full blood count: possible neutrophilia and thrombocytopenia (acute phase), or anaemia secondary to haemorrhage
(immune phase).
Cerebrospinal ﬂuid (immune phase): features of aseptic meningitis in CSF (see viral meningitis, Chapter 7).
Urine: mild proteinuria, leukocyturia, possible microscopic haematuria (acute phase).
Rest and treatment of pain and fever: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1).
Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) is contra-indicated (risk of haemorrhage).
doxycycline PO for 7 days
azithromycin PO for 3 days
amoxicillin PO for 7 days
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Antibiotic treatment
Children: 80 to 100 mg/kg (max. 2 g) once daily
Adults: 2 g once daily
or
Children: 50 000 IU (30 mg)/kg (max. 2 MIU or 1200 mg) every 6 hours
Adults: 1 to 2 MIU (600 to 1200 mg) every 6 hours
Prevention
 
ReferencesSpeciﬁc management according to organs affected. Oliguria generally responds to correction of hypovolaemia.
Rest and treatment of pain and fever: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1). Avoid or use paracetamol with caution in
patients with hepatic involvement.
ceftriaxone IV for 7 days a
benzylpenicillin IV for 7 days
Avoid bathing in freshwater in endemic areas.
Disinfect laundry and objects soiled by urine of infected animal or patient. 
Vaccination and protective clothing (only for professionals at risk of exposure).
Footnotes
(a)For IV administration of ceftriaxone, dilute with water for injection only.
1.World Health Organization. Human leptospirosis: guidance for diagnosis, surveillance and control. World Health Organization,
2003.
https://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/42667/WHO_CDS_CSR_EPH_2002.23.pdf?%20sequence=1&isAllowed=y
[Accessed 5 September 2022]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Relapsing fever (borreliosis)
 
 
 
 
Relapsing fever (FR) is caused by spirochetes of the genus Borrelia, transmitted to humans by arthropod vectors.Louse-borne relapsing fever (LBRF)
Tick-borne relapsing fever (TBRF)
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Louse-borne relapsing fever (LBRF)
Last updated: October 2022
 
 
LBRF is caused by Borrelia recurrentis. It occurs in epidemic waves when conditions favourable to the transmission of
body lice are met: cold climate/season, overcrowding and very poor sanitation (e.g. refugee camps, prisons). Endemic
foci of LBRF are mainly the Sudan and the Horn of Africa (especially Ethiopia). LBRF can be associated with louse-
borne typhus (see Eruptive rickettsioses). The mortality rate for untreated LBRF ranges from 15 to 40%.
Clinical features
 
In practice, in an applicable epidemiological setting (see above), a suspect case of LBRF is, according to WHO, a
patient with high fever and two of the following symptoms: severe joint pain, chills, jaundice or signs of bleeding (nose
or other bleeding) or a patient with high fever who is responding poorly to antimalarial drugs. Clothing should be
checked for the presence of body lice and nits.
Laboratory
The diagnosis is conﬁrmed by detection of Borrelia in thick or thin blood ﬁlms (Giemsa stain). Blood samples must be
collected during febrile periods. Spirochetes are not found in the  peripheral blood during afebrile periods. In addition,
the number of circulating spirochetes tends to decrease with each febrile episode.
TreatmentRelapsing fever is characterized by febrile episodes separated by afebrile periods of approximately 7 days (4 to 14
days).
The initial febrile episode lasts up to 6 days:
Sudden onset of high fever (axillary temperature > 39 °C), severe headache and asthenia, diffuse pain (muscle,
joint, back pain), often associated with gastrointestinal disturbances (anorexia, abdominal pain, vomiting,
diarrhoea).
Splenomegaly is common; bleeding signs (e.g. petechiae, subconjunctival haemorrhage, epistaxis, bleeding
gums), jaundice or neurological symptoms may be observed.
The febrile episode terminates in a crisis with an elevation in temperature, heart rate and blood pressure,
followed by a fall in temperature and blood pressure, which may last for several hours.
Following the initial febrile episode, the cycle usually reccurs; each episode is less severe than the previous one and
the patient develops temporary immunity.
Complications:
collapse during defervescence, myocarditis, cerebral haemorrhage;
during pregnancy: abortion, preterm delivery, in utero foetal death, neonatal death.
Antibiotic treatment (suspect or conﬁrmed cases and close contacts):
doxycycline PO
Children: 4 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) single dose 
Adults: 200 mg single dose
or
erythromycin PO
Children under 5 years: 250 mg single dose
Children 5 years and over and adults: 500 mg single doseThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
or
azithromycin PO
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 500 mg) single dose
Adults: 500 mg single dose
Treatment of pain and fever (paracetamol PO) and prevention or treatment of dehydration in the event of
associated diarrhoea.
Elimination of body lice is essential in control of epidemics (see Pediculosis, Chapter 4).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Tick-borne relapsing fever (TBRF)
Last update: October 2022
 
 
TBRFs are caused by different Borrelia species. They are endemic in temperate and warm regions of the word,
especially in Africa (Tanzania, DRC, Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, the Horn of Africa) and mainly in rural areas. TBRF is a
major cause of morbidity and mortality in children and pregnant women. The mortality rate for untreated TBRF ranges
from 2 to 15%.
Clinical features
The clinical manifestations and complications of TBRF are similar to those of LBRF but central nervous system (CNS)
involvement (particularly lymphocytic meningitis) is more frequent than in LBRF and the number of relapses is higher.
 
The clinical diagnosis is difﬁcult, especially during the ﬁrst episode: cases occur sporadically rather than in outbreaks;
the tick bite is painless and usually unnoticed by the patient; symptoms are very similar to those of malaria, typhoid
fever, leptospirosis, certain arbovirosis (yellow fever, dengue) or rickettsiosis, and meningitis.
Laboratory
Treatment
Children under 45 kg: 2.2 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily 
Children 45 kg and over and adults: 100 mg 2 times daily 
or
azithromycin PO for 7 to 10 days (if doxycycline is contra-indicated or not available)
Children: 10 mg/kg (max. 500 mg) once daily
Adults: 500 mg once daily
or
ceftriaxone IVfor 10 to 14 days (for pregnant women or in case of CNS involvement)
Children: 50 to 75 mg/kg (max. 2 g) once daily
Adults: 2 g once daily
 
  
Antibiotic treatment can trigger a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction with high fever, chills, fall in blood pressure and
sometimes shock. It is recommended to monitor the patient for 2 hours after the ﬁrst dose of antibiotic, for
occurrence and management of severe Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction (symptomatic treatment of shock).
Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction appears to occur more frequently in LBRF than in TBRF.
 As for LBRF, the diagnosis is conﬁrmed by detection of Borrelia in the patient’s blood.
Repeat the examination if the ﬁrst smear is negative despite strong clinical suspicion.
In all cases, rapid test for malaria in endemic regions (and antimalarial treatment if needed, see Malaria, Chapter 6).
Antibiotic treatment:
doxycycline PO for 7 to 10 days
 a 
Treatment of pain and fever (paracetamol PO) and prevention or treatment of dehydration in the event of
associated diarrhoea.
 
 This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Footnotes
(a)For IV administration of ceftriaxone, dilute with water for injection only.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Eruptive rickettsioses
Last update: October 2022
 
 
Rickettsioses are eruptive fevers caused by bacteria of the genus Rickettsia and transmitted to man by an arthropod
vector. Three main groups are distinguished: typhus group, spotted fever group and scrub typhus group.
Clinical features
 Common to all forms:
Sudden onset of fever (temperature of over 39 °C) with severe headache and myalgias.
3 to 5 days later; onset of generalised cutaneous eruption (see below).
Hypotension; non-dissociated rapid heart rate (variable).
Typhoid state: prostration, obnubilation, confusion and extreme asthenia, particularly marked in typhus forms.
Inoculation eschar: painless, black crusted lesion surrounded by a erythematous halo at the site of the bite.
Always check for this signiﬁcant sign.
Non-cutaneous signs vary from one form to another, and are atypical and variable (see below).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Laboratory
Detection of speciﬁc IgM of each group by indirect immunoﬂuorescence. The diagnosis is conﬁrmed by 2 serological
tests at an interval of 10 days. In practice, clinical signs and the epidemiological context are sufﬁcient to suggest the
diagnosis and start treatment.Group Typhus Spotted fever Scrub
typhus
Form Epidemic typhusMurine typhusMediterranean 
spotted feverRocky
Mountain
spotted feverOther Old-
World tick-
borne feversScrub typhus
Pathogen R. prowasekii R. typhi R. conorii R. rickettsii R. sibirica, R.
australisO.
tsutsugamushi
Vector body lice rat ﬂeas ticks ticks ticks mites
Reservoir man rats dogs rodents rodents, dogs,
etc.rodents
Occurence epidemic endemic endemic endemic endemic sporadic
Geographical
distributionworldwide,
conﬂicts; main
sites:
Burundi/Rwanda,
Ethiopiaworldwide around the
mediterranean,
Sub-Saharan
AfricaNorth America, 
Central
America,
Columbia,
BrazilSouthern
Africa,
Australia,
SiberiaFar East, India,
South Paciﬁc
Area
Rash maculopapularmaculopapularmaculopapular purpural maculopapular macular
Eschar 0 0 black
necrotic arearare black
necrotic areablack
necrotic area
Typhoid
state+++ +++ +/- +/- +/- +++
Extra-
cutaneous
signscough, myalgia,
meningeal signsgastrointestinal
signsmeningeal
signsgastrointestinal
and
neurological
signs,
hypotensionvariables meningeal
signs
Case fatality
(%)30 (without
treatment)5 2 5 1 0-30
Complications can be severe, and sometimes fatal: encephalitis, myocarditis, hepatitis, acute renal failure,
haemorrhage etc.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment
 
Children under 45 kg: 2.2 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily
Children 45 kg and over and adults: 100 mg 2 times daily
In severe infections, a loading dose of doxycycline is recommended:
Children under 45 kg: 4.4 mg/kg (max. 200 mg) on D1 then 2.2 mg /kg (max. 100 mg) 2 times daily
Children 45 kg and over and adults: 200 mg on D1 then 100 mg 2 times daily
 
Prevention
 Symptomatic treatment:
Hydration (PO or IV if the patient is unable to drink).
Fever: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1). Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) is contra-indicated due to the risk of
haemorrhage.
Antibioticfor 5 to 7 days or until 3 days after the fever has disappeared:
doxycycline PO a 
In a context of epidemic typhus, doxycycline PO is the choice treatment, but there is a risk of recurrence:
Children: 4 mg/kg (max. 100 mg) single dose 
Adults: 200 mg single dose
Epidemic typhus: control of body lice (see Pediculosis, Chapter 4).
Murine typhus: control of ﬂeas and then rats.
Spotted fevers: avoid tick bites by wearing clothing and using repellents.
Scrub typhus: use of repellents, chemoprophylaxis with doxycycline PO (200 mg once weekly in adults).
Footnotes
(a)Unlike borrelioses, antibiotic treatment of rickettsioses does not provoke a Jarisch-Herxheimer reaction. However, the
geographical distribution of borrelioses and rickettsioses may overlap, and thus a reaction may occur due to a possible co-
infection (see Borreliosis).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 8: Viral diseases
Measles
Poliomyelitis
Rabies
Viral hepatitis
Dengue
Viral haemorrhagic fevers
HIV infection and AIDS
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Measles
Measles is a highly contagious acute viral infection, transmitted by the airborne route (inhalation of respiratory droplets
spread by infected individuals). The disease mainly affects children under 5 years of age and can be prevented by
immunization.
 
For more information, refer to the guide Management of a measles epidemic, MSF.
Clinical features
The average incubation period is 10 days.
 
Prodromal or catarrhal phase (2 to 4 days)
 
Eruptive phase (4 to 6 days)
 
The eruptive phase is followed by skin desquamation during 1 to 2 weeks, very pronounced on pigmented skin (the skin
develops a striped appearance).
 
In practice, a patient presenting with fever and erythematous maculopapular rash and at least one of the following
signs: cough or runny nose or conjunctivitis, is a clinical case of measles.
Complications
Most measles cases experience at least one complication:
 
Pneumonia and dehydration are the most common immediate causes of death.
Case managementHigh fever (39-40 °C) with cough, coryza (nasal discharge) and/or conjunctivitis (red and watery eyes).
Koplik’s spots: tiny bluish-white spots on an erythematous base, found on the inside of the cheek. This sign is
speciﬁc of measles infection, but may be absent at the time of examination. Observation of Koplik's spots is not
required for diagnosing measles.
On average 3 days after the onset of symptoms: eruption of erythematous, non- pruritic maculopapules, which
blanch with pressure. The rash begins on the forehead then spreads downward to the face, neck, trunk
(second day), abdomen and lower limbs (third and fourth day).
As the rash progresses, prodromal symptoms subside. In the absence of complications, the fever disappears once
the rash reaches the feet.
The rash fades around the ﬁfth day in the same order that it appeared (from the head to the feet).
Respiratory and ENT: pneumonia, otitis media, laryngotracheobronchitis
Ocular: purulent conjunctivitis, keratitis, xerophthalmia (risk of blindness)
Gastrointestinal: diarrhoea with or without dehydration, benign or severe stomatitis
Neurological: febrile seizures; rarely, encephalitis
Acute malnutrition, provoked or aggravated by measles (post-measles period)
Admit as inpatient children with at least one major complication:
Inability to eat/drink/suck, or vomiting
Altered consciousness or seizures
Dehydration
Severe pneumonia (pneumonia with respiratory distress or cyanosis or SpO < 90%) 2
Acute laryngotracheobronchitis (croup) a
Corneal lesions (pain, photophobia, erosion or opacity)This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
If in doubt, keep the child under observation for a few hours.
Treatment
Supportive and preventive treatment
Treatment of complicationsSevere oral lesions that prevent eating
Acute malnutrition
Treat as outpatient children with no major complications, no complications or minor complications:
Pneumonia without severe signs
Acute otitis media
Purulent conjunctivitis (no corneal lesions)
Diarrhoea without dehydration
Oral candidiasis that does not interfere with eating
Isolation
Isolation of hospitalized patients
Measles cases treated as outpatients should be kept at home during this period.
Treat fever: paracetamol (Fever, Chapter 1).
Make the child drink (high risk of dehydration).
Give smaller, more frequent meals or breastfeed more frequently (every 2 to 3 hours).
Clear the nasopharynx (nose-blowing or nasal lavages) to prevent secondary respiratory infection and improve the
child’s comfort.
Clean the eyes with clean water 2 times daily and administer retinol on D1 and D2 (see Xerophthalmia, Chapter 5) to
prevent ocular complications.
In children under 5 years: amoxicillin PO for 5 days as a preventive measure (reduction of respiratory and ocular
infections).
In the event of watery diarrhoea without dehydration: oral rehydration according to WHO Plan A (see Dehydration,
Chapter 1).
Insert a nasogastric tube for a few days if oral lesions prevent the child from drinking.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Prevention
   Treatment of complications
Severe pneumonia ceftriaxone IV or IM + cloxacillin IV then change to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid
PO (see Chapter 2)
+ oxygen if cyanosis or SpO < 90%
+ salbutamol if expiratory wheezing and sibilant rales on auscultation
In all cases, close monitoring.2
Pneumonia without severe
signsamoxicillin PO for 5 days
Croup Inpatient monitoring (risk of worsening). Keep the child calm. Agitation and crying
exacerbate the symptoms.
For severe croup:
dexamethasone IM: 0.6 mg/kg single dose
+ nebulized epinephrine (adrenaline, 1 mg/ml ampoule): 0.5 ml/kg (max. 5 ml)
+ oxygen if cyanosis or SpO < 90%
Intensive monitoring until symptoms resolve.2
Acute otitis media See Otitis, Chapter 2.
Dehydration Per oral route or IV depending on the degree of dehydration.
Oral candidiasis See Stomatitis, Chapter 3.
Purulent conjunctivitis See Conjunctivitis, Chapter 5.
Keratitis/keratoconjunctivitistetracycline 1% eye ointment 2 times daily for 7 days
+ retinol PO one dose on D1, D2 and D8 (see Xerophthalmia, Chapter 5)
+ eye protection and pain management (see Pain, Chapter 1).
No topical corticosteroids.
Xerophthalmia See Xerophthalmia, Chapter 5.
Febrile seizures See Seizures, Chapter 1.
No chemoprophylaxis for contacts.
Vaccination:
Between 9 and 12 months: one dose of 0.5 ml. The WHO recommends a second dose between 15 and 18
months. Respect an interval of at least 4 weeks between doses.
Where there is high risk of infection (overcrowding, epidemics, malnutrition, infants born to a mother with HIV
infection, etc.), administer a supplementary dose from 6 months of age then continue vaccination schedule.
Children under 15 years who have missed either one or both doses of routine vaccination should be vaccinated
when they come in contact with health services. Check national recommendations.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Footnotes
(a)Symptoms (hoarse crying or voice, difﬁculty breathing, a high-pitched inspiratory wheeze [inspiratory stridor], characteristic
"barking" cough) are caused by inﬂammation and narrowing of the larynx. Croup is considered benign or “moderate” if the
stridor occurs when the child is agitated or crying, but disappears when the child is calm. The child should be monitored
during this period, however, because his general and respiratory status can deteriorate rapidly. Croup is severe when the
stridor persists at rest or is associated with signs of respiratory distress.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Poliomyelitis
Poliomyelitis is an acute viral infection due to a poliovirus (serotypes 1, 2 or 3). Human-to-human transmission is direct
(faecal-oral) or indirect (ingestion of food and water contaminated by stool). Humans are the only reservoir of the virus.
In principle the disease can be eradicated by mass vaccination.
 
In endemic areas, poliomyelitis mainly affect children under 5 years not (or not fully) vaccinated, but the infection can
affect persons of any age, especially in areas where population immunity is low.
Clinical features
Laboratory
Look for the polio virus in stool samples. The virus is excreted for one month after infection, but only intermittently;
therefore, 2 samples must be collected with an interval of 24-48 hours, and within 14 days of onset of symptoms
. Send the stool samples to a reference laboratory, with a clinical description of the patient. The stool samples must be
stored and transported between 0 °C and 8 °C.
Treatment
Outbreak control in case of acute ﬂaccid paralysis (AFP)Up to 90% of cases are asymptomatic or present mild symptoms. [1] 
Non-paralytic form: a non-speciﬁc febrile illness with muscle pain, headache, vomiting, backache; no neurological
involvement. As spontaneous recovery usually occurs within 10 days, diagnosis is rarely made outside epidemic
contexts.
Paralytic form: in less than 1% of cases, after the non-speciﬁc signs, the patient develops rapid onset (from the
morning to the evening) asymmetrical acute ﬂaccid paralysis, predominantly of the lower limbs, with ascending
progression. The muscles become soft with diminished reﬂexes. Sensation is maintained. The disease is life
threatening if paralysis involves the respiratory muscles or muscles of swallowing. Initial urinary retention is common.
Gastrointestinal disturbances (nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea), muscle pain and meningeal symptoms may also occur.
 [2]
Hospitalise patients with the paralytic form: rest, prevent bed sores in bedridden patients, give analgesics (do not
give IM injections to patients in the febrile phase), ventilate patients with respiratory paralysis.
Physiotherapy once the lesions are stable to prevent muscle atrophy and contractures.
Care for sequelae: physiotherapy, surgery and prosthetics.
Consider any patient with AFP as a suspected case of poliomyelitis.
Send stool samples to a reference laboratory to conﬁrm the diagnosis.  
Organize vaccination of all children under 5 years living in the area (from the same village or neighbouring villages)
irrespective of their vaccination status, within 14 days of laboratory conﬁrmation and with the available vaccine
(round 0). [3] 
Organize two mass vaccination campaigns within 8 weeks of the laboratory conﬁrmation. The type of vaccine, the
area and the age groups are determined by epidemiological data.
Organize a mop-up (door-to-door) vaccination campaign wherever monitoring suggests that children have been
missed, to ensure interruption of transmission.
Surveillance: for each case of AFP there are between 100 and 200 subclinical cases. Therefore, active surveillance
to detect new cases is essential for epidemic control.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Prevention
In children who start routine vaccination late (after the age of 3 months), the dose of IPV is administered together with
the ﬁrst dose of bOPV, followed by 2 doses of bOPV alone administered 4 weeks apart.
There is also an ‘IPV only’ schedule: 3 doses administered at least 4 weeks apart (e.g. at 6, 10 and 14 weeks) and a
booster dose at least 6 months later.
IPV should eventually completely replace bOPV.
 
References3 types of vaccines exist:
a trivalent injectable inactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV),
a bivalent oral live attenuated poliovirus vaccine (bOPV), containing serotypes 1 and 3,
a monovalent oral type 2 vaccine (mOPV or nOPV) exclusively used for responding to epidemics.
Vaccination schedule: depends on the epidemiology of the virus.
Protocols vary according to the country, follow national recommendations. For information, the WHO
recommends:
SchedulePrimary vaccination
Endemic or at risk zones (a)Other zones
Birth 1 dose bOPV (b)–
6 weeks 1 dose bOPV 1 dose bOPV
10 weeks 1 dose bOPV 1 dose bOPV
14 weeks 1 dose bOPV + 1 dose IPV 1 dose bOPV + 1 dose IPV
(a)Countries where poliomyelitis is endemic or zones at high risk of importation and subsequent spread of the virus.
(b)The ﬁrst dose of bOPV is administered at birth, or as soon as possible, to optimise seroconversion rates after subsequent
doses and induce mucosal protection.
1.World Health Organization. Poliomyelitis (polio).
https://www.who.int/health-topics/poliomyelitis#tab=tab_1 [Accessed 08 June 2021]
2.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Poliomyelitis. 2020.
https://www.cdc.gov/vaccines/pubs/pinkbook/polio.html [Accessed 08 June 2021]
3.Global Polio Eradication Initiative. Standard operating procedures: responding to a poliovirus event or outbreak, version 3.1.
World Health Organization. 2020.
https://www.who.int/publications/i/item/9789240002999 [Accessed 08 June 2021]This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Rabies
Rabies is a viral infection of wild and domestic mammals, transmitted to humans by the saliva of infected animals
through bites, scratches or licks on broken skin or mucous membranes. 
 
In endemic areas (Africa and Asia), 99% of cases are due to dog bites and 40% of cases are children under 15 years of
age.
 
Before symptoms develop, rabies can effectively be prevented by post-exposure prophylaxis.
Once symptoms develop, rabies is fatal. There is no curative treatment; care is palliative. 
Clinical features
 
Diagnosis is often difﬁcult: there may be no history of scratch or bite (exposure through licking) or wounds may have
healed; a reliable history may be difﬁcult to obtain.
Post-exposure prophylaxis
Deﬁnitions of exposure categories (WHO)
 
Post-exposure prophylaxis is carried out for Category II and III exposures.
Treatment of the wound
In all cases [1] 
The incubation period averages 20 to 90 days from exposure (75% of patients), but can be shorter (in severe
exposure, e.g. bites to face, head and hands; multiple bites), or longer (20% of patients develop symptoms
between 90 days and 1 year, and 5% more than 1 year after exposure).
Prodromal phase: itching or paraesthesiae or neuropathic pain around the site of exposure, and non-speciﬁc
symptoms (fever, malaise, etc.).
Neurologic phase:
Encephalitic form (furious form): psychomotor agitation or hydrophobia (throat spasms and panic, triggered by
attempting to drink or sight/sound/touch of water) and aerophobia (similar response to a draft of air); sometimes
seizures. The patient is calm and lucid between episodes. Infection evolves to paralysis and coma.
Paralytic form (less common, 20% of cases): progressive ascending paralysis resembling Guillain-Barré
syndrome; evolves to coma.
Category I Contact with animal, or licks on intact skin No exposure
Category IINibbles on exposed skin
Minor bite(s) or scratch(es) without bleedingMinor exposure
Category IIITransdermal bite(s) or scratch(es)
Licks on broken skin
Contamination of mucous membranes by animal’s saliva (licks)
Direct contact with bats aSevere exposure
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Prolonged cleansing of the wound or contact site for 15 minutes to eliminate the virus, as soon as possible after
exposure, is of critical importance. For skin: use soap, rinse copiously with running water, remove all foreign material;
application of a disinfectant (povidone iodine 10% or other) is an additional precaution which does not take the place
of thorough wound washing. For mucous membranes (eye, mouth, etc.): rinse thoroughly with water or 0.9% sodium
chloride. Local cleansing is indicated even if the patient presents late.
According to condition/type of wound
In order to avoid inoculating virus deeper into the tissues, wounds are either not sutured at all (e.g. superﬁcial, non-
mutilating or puncture wounds), or are left open and re-evaluated in 48-72 hours, with a view to possible closure. Highly
contaminated wounds, or wounds that may compromise function, require surgical management (exploration, removal
of foreign material, excision of necrotic tissue, copious irrigation with sterile 0.9% sodium chloride or Ringer lactate,
with local or general anaesthesia). When suturing is indicated (face), rabies immunoglobulin should be administered
several hours before wound closure (see below). Infected wounds are not sutured and reassessed daily.
Passive and active immunisation
Given the duration of incubation, administration of vaccine/immunoglobulin is always a priority, even for patients
exposed several months previously.
Anti-rabies serotherapy
Rabies immunoglobulin is indicated after:
 
It is intended to neutralize virus in the exposure site. It is given as a single dose on D0, with the ﬁrst dose of rabies
vaccine.
human rabies immunoglobulin:
Children and adults: 20 IU/kg
or
highly puriﬁed rabies immunoglobulin F(ab')2 fragments:
Children and adults: 40 IU/kg
 
Inﬁltrate rabies immunoglobulin into and around the previously washed wound(s). Ensure it is not injected into a blood
vessel (risk of shock).
For ﬁnger wounds, inﬁltrate very cautiously to avoid increased pressure in the tissue compartment (compartment
syndrome).
In the event of multiple wounds, dilute the dose 2- to 3-fold with sterile 0.9% sodium chloride to obtain a sufﬁcient
quantity to inﬁltrate all the sites exposed.
Inﬁltrate rabies immunoglobulin into the wound even if it has already healed. 
For mucosal exposures with no wound, rinse with rabies immunoglobulin diluted in sterile 0.9% sodium chloride.
 
Monitor the patient during and after the injection (low risk of anaphylactic reaction).
 
If rabies immunoglobulin is not available on D0, the ﬁrst dose of rabies vaccine is administered alone. Administer rabies
immunoglobulin as soon as possible between D0 and D7; from D8, it is not necessary to
administer rabies immunoglobulin as vaccine-induced antibodies begin to appear.
Post-exposure rabies prophylaxis Category III exposures (except in patients who have received a full course of pre-exposure prophylaxis against
rabies, see Prevention); 
Category II and III exposures in immunocompromised patients(even in patients who have received a full course of
pre-exposure prophylaxis against rabies). b 
 [1]This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
A complete prophylaxis series is indicated for Category II and III exposures. It should be started on D0 and continued to
completion if the risk of rabies has not been excluded. Several different types of rabies vaccines prepared from cell
cultures (CCEEV) exist.  These vaccines must replace nerve tissue vaccines (NTV). 
Prophylaxis schedules may vary from country to country, check national recommendations. The patient must be
administered the full course of doses indicated. 
Main post-exposure prophylaxis regimens
Notes:
Other measures
Antibiotherapy/antibiotic prophylaxis c 
 [1]
DateNo pre-exposure prophylaxis or unknown prophylaxis status 
or incomplete pre-exposure prophylaxis or complete pre-exposure prophylaxis with an NTV
IM route
1 dose = 0.5 or 1 ml depending on the
manufacturer (a) ID route
1 dose = 0.1 ml (b) 
D02 doses
(1 dose in each arm or thigh) (c) 1 dose (c)2 doses
(1 dose in each arm) (c) 
D3   1 dose2 doses 
(1 dose in each arm)
D7 1 dose 1 dose2 doses 
(1 dose in each arm)
D14   1 dose (d) 
D21 1 dose    
(a)IM route: there are two possible schedules, the Zagreb regimen (2-0-1-0-1) over 21 days or the 4-dose Essen regimen (1-1-
1-1-0) over 14 to 28 days. The IM injection is administered into the anterolateral part of the thigh in children < 2 years; into
the deltoid muscle (arm) in children ≥ 2 years and adults; do not administer into the gluteal muscle.
(b)ID route: inject into the deltoid muscle (or the suprascapular region or the anterolateral part of the thigh). Incorrect ID
technique results in failure of post-exposure prophylaxis. If correct ID technique cannot be assured, use IM route.
(c)As well as a single dose of rabies immunoglobulin on D0 if indicated.
(d)The last injection can be administered between D14 and D28.
In immunocompromised patients: 1 dose on D0, 1 dose on D7 and 1 dose between D21 and D28. [1]
In patients that have received a full course of pre-exposure prophylaxis (see  Prevention), the post-exposure
regimen is: 1 dose on D0 and 1 dose D3 by IM or ID route or 4 doses by ID route on D0.
 [2]This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
The same dosage is used for both treatment and prophylaxis:
The treatment of choice is amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO
Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily 
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 
Ratio 8:1: 2000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 1750 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times daily)
Tetanus vaccination and serotherapy
Check prophylaxis status. If unknown or not up-to-date, see Tetanus, Chapter 7.
Prevention
Pre-exposure prophylaxis with a CCEEV for people at risk (prolonged stay in rabies endemic areas, professionals in
contact with animals susceptible of carrying the virus, etc): 1 dose by IM route or 2 doses by ID route on D0 and D7.
 Infection present No infection
andNo infection 
and
local: redness,
oedema, serosanguinous
or purulent drainage
locoregional or general:
lymphangitis, lymphadenopathy,
localised cellulitis, bone or joint
infection, feverwounds on the face or hands or
genital region
wounds involving joint, tendon,
ligament or fracture
deep puncture wounds
wounds with crush injury
wounds very contaminated or
requiring debridement
wounds where correct debridement
is not possible
immunocompromised patientsno criteria requiring antibiotic
prophylaxis
wounds more than 24-48
hours old
Antibiotherapy PO 7 days in the event
of local non severe infection;
14 days in the event of severe local
infection, or widespread generalised
infection.Antibiotic prophylaxis PO 5 to 7 days No antibiotic prophylaxis
 d 
Footnotes
(a)In the event of direct contact with bats, check national recommendations.
(b)For example, for HIV-infected patients: CD4 ≤ 25% in children < 5 years and < 200 cells/mm³ in children ≥ 5 years and adults.
(http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/272371/WER9316.pdf?ua=1)
(c)Either through observation of the captured animal (if domestic) or through laboratory diagnosis of the animal (killed). The
WHO recommends a 10-day observation period of the animal, if captured. If no signs of rabies develop during the
observation period, the risk of rabies is excluded, and post-exposure prophylaxis is discontinued. Laboratory diagnosis of
the dead animal involves sending the head to a specialised laboratory, which conﬁrms or excludes rabies in the animal. If
laboratory diagnosis is negative, risk of rabies is excluded, and post-exposure prophylaxis is discontinued.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
References(d)In penicillin-allergic patients: 
• Children: co-trimoxazole (30 mg SMX + 6 mg TMP/kg 2 times daily) + clindamycin (10 mg/kg 3 times daily) 
• Adults: co-trimoxazole (800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP 2 times daily) or doxycycline (100 mg 2 times daily or 200 mg once
daily, except in pregnant and lactating women) + metronidazole (500 mg 3 times daily).
1.Weekly epidemiological record/Relevé épidémiologique hebdomadaire, 20 April 2018, 93th year/20 avril 2018, 93e année.
No 16, 2018, 93, 201–220.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/272371/WER9316.pdf?ua=1 [Accessed 25 october 2018]
2.Spencer O, Banerjee S. Animal bites. BMJ Best practice 2018 [Accessed 25 october 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Viral hepatitis
Last updated: October 2021
 
Several viral infections of the liver are grouped under the heading of viral hepatitis: hepatitis A, B, C, D (delta) and E.
The different hepatitis viruses are present throughout the world, but their prevalence varies by country. Hepatitis A and
B are common in developing countries where the vast majority of infections occur during childhood.
 
The clinical characteristics of all ﬁve diseases are similar enough to make differential diagnosis difﬁcult; however, there
are epidemiological, immunological and pathological differences. Patients with hepatitis B, C and D may later develop
chronic liver disease.
The main characteristics of each type of viral hepatitis are summarized in the table below.
Clinical features
 
The various forms of viral hepatitisAsymptomatic forms
Mild or anicteric forms are the most common, irrespective of the causal virus. 
Icteric forms
Insidious or sudden onset with symptoms of varying intensity: fever, fatigue, nausea, gastrointestinal disturbance,
followed by jaundice, dark coloured urine and more or less claycoloured stool.
Fulminant forms
Hepatocellular failure with severe cytolysis that can be fatal. This form is most frequent in hepatitis B patients with
secondary infection with the D virus, and in the event of pregnant women infected with hepatitis E during their third
trimester.
Chronic hepatitis
Hepatitis B, C and D may lead to cirrhosis and/or hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
  Hepatitis A Hepatitis B Hepatitis C Hepatitis D Hepatitis E
Age group
most at riskChildren Children Young adults Young adults Young adults
TransmissionFaecal-oral
Contaminated
food and
water
Transfusion
(rare)Vertical
Close contact with infected
person (especially intra-
familial).
Exposure to blood
(transfusion; material
contaminated with blood)
Sexual (a) Exposure to
blood
(transfusion;
material
contaminated
with blood)
Sexual (low)
Intranasal
(implements
shared by
intranasal drug
users)
Vertical (a)Exposure to
blood
(transfusion;
material
contaminated
with blood)
Sexual
Possibly
vertical (a)Faecal-oral
Contaminated
food and water
Incubation
period2 to 6 weeks 4 to 30 weeks (average 10
weeks)2 to 25 weeksCo-infection
B/D: as for
hepatitis B
Secondary
infection of
hepatitis B:
approximately
5 weeks2 to 8 weeks
Fulminant
forms0.2 to 0.4% 1 to 3% More rare than
in hepatitis BMuch more
common in
patients with
secondary
infection of
hepatitis B
than in patients
with B/D co-
infection20% mortality
in pregnant
women
Prognosis No chronic
formsChronicity: 0.2 to 10% (risk
is inversely related to age,
e.g. up to 90% if infected
before the age of 1 year) of
which 5 to 15% progress to
cirrhosis.
HCC possibleChronicity: up
to 50%, of
which 10 to
25% progress
to cirrhosis.
HCC possibleChronicity: <
5% for
patients with
B/D co-
infection; >
90% if
secondary
infection of
hepatitis B
(rapid cirrhosis)No chronic
forms
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Laboratory
Diagnosis
Other tests
Other investigations
Elastography (Fibroscan®): measures the elasticity of the liver to determine stage of liver ﬁbrosis, scored from
F0 (absence of ﬁbrosis) to F4 (cirrhosis).
Treatment
Treatment of chronic active hepatitis B 
The goal of treatment is to reduce the risk of cirrhosis and HCC. Individual
preventionPolyvalent
immunoglobulinSpeciﬁc anti-HBs
immunoglobulin
Safe sex (condoms)Speciﬁc anti-
HBs
immunoglobulin
may be
effectiveAs for hepatitis
B (the D virus
can only
develop with
B)Cook meat
(pork)
Vaccination Anti-hepatitis
AAnti-hepatitis B Does not exist Anti-hepatitis
BDoes not exist
Collective
preventionHygiene,
sanitationLimit transfusion, screen blood prior to transfusion
Single use of disposable materialHygiene,
sanitation
(a)Vertical transmission: transmission of the virus from the mother to the child during pregnancy, at the time of delivery, or
during the ﬁrst 28 days after birth.
HAV, HDV and HEV infection: detection of IgM anti-HAV, anti-HDV and anti-HEV antibodies, respectively.
HBV infection: detection of HBsAg; chronic hepatitis B: presence of HBsAG for longer 6 months; chronic active
hepatitis B: detection of HBeAg and/or HBV DNA.
HCV infection: detection of anti-HCV antibodies and HCV RNA; chronic hepatitis C: viraemia persists for longer
than 6 months.
ALT (or AST) level, platelet count, creatinine, HCV diagnosis and HBV viral load to decide treatment of chronic
active hepatitis B.
APRI score (evaluation of liver ﬁbrosis in chronic hepatitis): [(patient's AST level/normal AST level) x 100]/platelet
count (10 platelets/litre). An APRI score > 1 indicates probable severe ﬁbrosis.9
HIV test.
Rest, hydration, no special diet.
Do not administer drug therapy for symptomatic treatment (analgesics, antipyretics, antidiarrhoeals, antiemetics
etc.) during the acute phase as it may aggravate symptoms and the evolution of hepatitis. Corticosteroids are not
indicated.
Stop or reduce alcohol consumption.
Patients with HIV co-infection 
Lifelong antiretroviral therapy of HIV that includes tenofovir. Do not administer tenofovir monotherapy or tenofovirThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment of chronic hepatitis C
 
In case of decompensated cirrhosis (presence of ascites or jaundice or mental confusion or signs of gastrointestinal
haemorrhage): same treatment but for 24 weeks.
 
Treatment is contra-indicated during pregnancy and breastfeeding.
For women of childbearing age: provide a contraceptive; do not start treatment in women who do not want
contraception.
Vaccination
 
 dual therapy with lamivudine or emtricitabine (risk of developing HIV drug resistance). 
Patients without HIV co-infection 
Treatment is indicated in the event of cirrhosis or advanced hepatic ﬁbrosis (APRI score > 1.5 or Fibroscan F3-F4 >
10 kPa); HBsAg positive with persistently elevated ALT or AST > 2 times the normal values in 2 samples taken 3 or
6 months apart; or persistently elevated ALT or AST with a high viral load (> 20 000 IU/ml).
tenofovir PO (300 mg tab, equivalent to 245 mg of tenofovir disoproxil), lifelong therapy:
Children ≥ 12 years and adults, including pregnant women: one tablet once daily taken with a meal
 [1]
Genotypes 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6 without cirrhosis
or with compensated cirrhosissofosbuvir/velpatasvir PO (400 mg SOF/100 mg VEL tablet)
1 tablet once daily for 12 weeks
Genotypes 1, 2, 4, 5, 6 without cirrhosis
or with compensated cirrhosis
Genotype 3 without cirrhosissofosbuvir/daclatasvir PO (400 mg SOF/60 mg DCV tablet) 
1 tablet once daily for 12 weeks
Genotype 3 with compensated cirrhosis sofosbuvir/daclatasvir PO (400 mg SOF/60 mg DCV tablet)
1 tablet once daily for 24 weeks
Routine vaccination of neonates and infants (according to national vaccination schedule):   [2] 
3 dose schedule: one dose as soon as possible after birth, preferably within the ﬁrst 24 hours of life, then one
dose at 6 weeks and one dose at 14 weeks a
4 dose schedule: one dose as soon as possible after birth, preferably within the ﬁrst 24 hours of life, then one
dose at 6 weeks, one dose at 10 weeks and one dose at 14 weeks a
Catch-up vaccination (unvaccinated individuals):
3 dose schedule (0-1-6): 2 doses 4 weeks apart, then a third dose 6 months after the ﬁrst dose
Post-exposure prophylaxis:
One dose on D0, one dose on D7 and one dose between D21 and D30 then a booster dose 12 months after the
ﬁrst dose
Footnotes
(a)At birth, only the monovalent hepatitis B vaccine can be used.
For the following doses, a monovalent or tetravalent (diphtheria, tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B) or pentavalent (diphtheria,
tetanus, pertussis, hepatitis B and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae) vaccine can be used, depending on national recommendations.
If an infant was not administered the birth dose, this dose can be administered at anytime during the ﬁrst contact with
health-care providers, up to the time of the next dose of the primary schedule.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
References
1.World Health Organization. Guidelines for the care and treatment of persons diagnosed with chronic hepatitis C virus
infection. July 2018.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/273174/9789241550345-eng.pdf?ua=1 [Accessed 21 December 2018]
2.Weekly epidemiological record/Relevé épidémiologique hebdomadaire 7 JULY 2017, 92th YEAR / 7 JUILLET 2017, 92e ANNÉE
No 27, 2017, 92, 369–392 
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/255841/WER9227.pdf?sequence=1 [Accessed 22 November 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Dengue
Last update: October 2022
 
 
Dengue fever is an arbovirus transmitted to humans by the bite of a mosquito (Aedes). Transmission by transfusion of
contaminated blood and transplacental transmission to the foetus have also been reported.
Four different serotypes of dengue have been described. Infection with one serotype provides a lifelong immunity to
that speciﬁc serotype, but only partial, short-term immunity to other serotypes. There is no speciﬁc antiviral treatment.
 
Dengue is a mainly urban disease, present in tropical and subtropical regions, in particular in Asia, Central and South
America and the Caribbean. Outbreaks have been described in Eastern Africa.
 
Primary infection may be asymptomatic or present as mild or occasionally severe dengue fever. Subsequent infections
increase the risk of severe dengue.
Clinical features
After the incubation period (4 to 10 days), the illness occurs in 3 phases:
  a 
Febrile phase: high fever (39 to 40 °C) lasting 2 to 7 days, often accompanied by generalized aches, a
maculopapular rash and mild haemorrhagic manifestations. 
Critical phase (between the third and seventh day): at the end of the febrile phase, temperature decreases. The
majority of patients will have dengue without warning signs and proceed to the recovery phase. Certain patients will
develop dengue with warning sign(s) at this stage. These patients are at higher risk for developing severe dengue.
Recovery phase: patient improves, vital signs normalise, gastrointestinal symptoms subside and appetite returns.
At times, bradycardia and generalized pruritus.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Major differential diagnoses
Other conditions to consider include a wide range of acute febrile illnesses, e.g.:  
Laboratory
DiagnosisSymptoms according to severity (adapted from PAHO) [1] 
Dengue
without warning
signsFever + 2 of the following symptoms:
Nausea, vomiting
Rash resembling measles
Generalized aches (headache, retro-orbital pain, myalgias, arthralgias)
Benign mucocutaneous bleeding (petechiae, positive tourniquet test, epistaxis, gingival
bleeding) (a) 
Leucopenia
Dengue
with warning signsPresence of at least one of these symptoms:
Intense abdominal pain
Persistent vomiting
Fluid accumulation (ascites, pleural effusion)
Mucosal bleeding
Hepatomegaly (> 2 cm)
Postural hypotension
Agitation or lethargy
Increasing haematocrit
Severe dengue Severe ﬂuid accumulation (ascites, pleural effusion) with respiratory distress and/or shock
Severe mucocutaneous bleeding
Severe organ involvement (e.g.: transaminases > 1000 IU/litre, myocarditis, altered mental
status)
(a)Tourniquet test: inﬂate a blood pressure cuff on the upper arm to a point midway between the systolic and diastolic
pressure for 5 min. The test is positive when 20 or more petechiae per 2.5 cm square are observed.
Chikungunya, Zika, inﬂuenza, mononucleosis, measles, rubella, viral haemorrhagic fevers 
Malaria  
Meningococcemia, typhoid fever, leptospirosis, rickettsioses, other causes of sepsis 
Leukaemia   
NS-1 antigen detection during febrile phase with rapid diagnostic test or ELISA (serum, plasma or blood). 
Antibody detection (complex interpretation): 
IgM detection 5 to 6 days after onset of illness may support (but does not conﬁrm) a diagnosis of recent
infection;
IgG detection may indicate prior infection by, or vaccination against, dengue virus or a closely related virus (e.g.
chikungunya, Zika, Japanese encephalitis, yellow fever).
PCR may also be available in reference laboratories. 
In all cases, rapid test for malaria in endemic regions (and antimalarial treatment if needed, see Malaria, Chapter 6).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Monitoring disease course
Treatment
Patients in Group A (outpatients)
Patients with no warning signs, able to drink sufﬁciently and with a normal urine output.
Patients in Group B (inpatients)
Patients with any of the following:
 
In all cases:
 
If poor oral intake:
 
If warning signs:Haematocrit (Hct) or if available full blood count (FBC) at baseline, then daily if possible.
A progressive increase in Hct is a warning sign. It indicates haemoconcentration due to increased vascular
permeability (plasma leakage). Hct should be monitored frequently (before and after ﬂuid administration) in
patients with warning signs up to the end of the ﬂuid treatment. 
Leukopenia and thrombocytopenia are common and improve as the recovery phase begins. Leukocytosis may
occur with severe bleeding.
Liver function tests if possible at baseline, then according to results.
Bed rest and good hydration.
Fever and pain: paracetamol PO at the usual doses (see Fever, Chapter 1), maintaining a 6 to 8 hour interval
between doses. Do not prescribe acetylsalicylic acid, ibuprofen or other NSAIDs.
Seek medical attention if: no clinical improvement, persistent vomiting, cold extremities, agitation or lethargy,
breathing difﬁculties or absence of urine output.
If follow-up is impossible or symptoms cannot be monitored at home (patients living far from the health care
facility/living alone), hospitalise for observation.
Warning sign(s) 
Acute (e.g. severe dehydation or malaria) or chronic (e.g. diabetes, cardiovascular, renal or haemolytic disease,
obesity) co-morbidities
Risk factors for bleeding (e.g. anticoagulation, coagulopathy, peptic ulcer or gastritis, treatment with NSAIDs) 
Pregnant women, patients under 1 year or 65 years and over or patients with difﬁculty drinking
Place the patient under a mosquito net; encourage oral ﬂuid intake (including oral rehydration solution (ORS) if
needed).
Avoid invasive procedures (nasogastric tube, IM injections) to minimize the risk of bleeding.
Fever and pain: paracetamol PO with caution and without exceeding:  [2] 
children: 10 mg/kg every 6 to 8 hours
adults: 500 mg every 6 to 8 hours
In case of elevated transaminases ≥ 10 times the upper limit of normal, do not administer paracetamol. Use tepid
sponging for reducing fever.
Monitor vital signs, ﬂuid intake (infusion and oral) and urine output every 4 hours. b 
Place an intravenous line and administer:
children: 5% glucose + Ringer lactate solutionas maintenance ﬂuids, according to the Holliday-Segar
formula, i.e. 4 ml/kg/hour for ﬁrst 10 kg of body weight + 2 ml/kg/hour for next 10 kg + 1 ml/kg/hour for each
additional kg above 20 kg. c 
adults: Ringer lactate, 2 to 3 ml/kg/hour
Encourage oral intake as soon as possible.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Patients in Group C (intensive care unit)
Patients with severe dengue requiring emergency treatment for managing shock and other complications (e.g. severe
bleeding, acidosis, coagulopathy).
Prevention
 
ReferencesMonitor clinical status (warning signs, general symptoms, vital signs, capillary reﬁll time), IV and oral ﬂuid intake, urine
output, hourly for at least 4 hours, then every 4 hours while the patient is on IV ﬂuid treatment.
Place an intravenous line and administer a bolus of Ringer lactate:
children and adults: 10 ml/kg over one hour
patients 65 years and over or with co-morbidities : 5 ml/kg over one hour
 Re-assess the patient:
If no improvement after ﬁrst bolus: administer a second bolus as above. If necessary, a total of 3 boluses can
be administered. If still no improvement after 3 bolus, consider as severe dengue (patients in Group C) and
transfer to intensive care unit.
If improvement after the ﬁrst, second, or third bolus, reduce Ringer lactate:
children and adults: 5 to 7 ml/kg/hour over 2 to 4 hours
patients 65 years and over or with co-morbidities: 5 ml/kg/hour over 2 to 4 hours
If continuing improvement, reduce Ringer lactate (then stop as soon as possible to reduce the risk of ﬂuid
overload):
children and adults: 3 to 5 ml/kg/hour over 2 to 4 hours, then 2 to 4 ml/kg/hour over 24 to 48 hours
patients 65 years and over or with co-morbidities: 3 ml/kg/hour over 2 to 4 hours, then 2 ml/kg/hour over 24
to 48 hours
If the patient deteriorates after initial improvement, resume the bolus therapy with Ringer lactate (up to 3 bolus)
as above.
Individual protection: long sleeves and trousers, repellents, mosquito net (Aedes bites during the day).
Elimination of mosquito breeding sites (small collections of water in discarded tires, ﬂower pots, and other
containers).
Footnotes
(a)For more information:
http://gamapserver.who.int/mapLibrary/Files/Maps/Global_DengueTransmission_ITHRiskMap.png?ua=1
(b)Adequate urine output: at least 1 ml/kg/hour in children and 0.5 ml/kg/hour in adults. If unavailable, ensure that the patient is
urinating at least every 4 hours.
(c)Remove 50 ml of Ringer lactate (RL) from a 500 ml RL bottle or bag, then add 50 ml of 50% glucose to the remaining 450 ml
of RL to obtain 500 ml of 5% glucose-RL solution.
 
1.Pan American Health Organization. Dengue: guidelines for patient care in the Region of the Americas, 2nd edition.
Washington, D.C.: PAHO, 2016.
https://iris.paho.org/bitstream/handle/10665.2/31207/9789275118900-eng.pdf?sequence=1&isAllowed=y [Accessed 23 Aug
2022]
2.Pan American Health Organization. Guidelines for the Clinical Diagnosis and Treatment of Dengue, Chikungunya, and Zika.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Washington, D.C. : PAHO; 2022.  
https://iris.paho.org/handle/10665.2/55867 [Accessed 16 Aug 2022]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Viral haemorrhagic fevers
Several diseases with different aetiologies and different modes of transmission are grouped under this term as they
present with common clinical signs.
Dengue haemorrhagic fever is a viral haemorrhagic fever that is described in a speciﬁc chapter (see Dengue, Chapter
8).
Clinical features
 Common syndrome (CS):
Fever higher than 38.5 °C;
Haemorrhagic symptoms (purpura, epistaxis, haematemesis, melaena, etc.).
The clinical signs are often nonspeciﬁc; the severity varies depending on the aetiology.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Laboratory Reservoir/ Vector
Geographical
distributionIsolation
of
patientsClinical featuresEstimated
case
fatality
rate
EbolaMarburg  (a) Bats (?)
AfricaStrict
isolationCS + sudden onset general malaise,
vomiting and diarrhoea60-80%
Lassa (a)Rodents 
West Africa (b)Strict
isolationCS + general malaise, headache, muscle
pain, facial oedema, pharyngitis, proteinuria
on reagent strip15-20%
Junin and
Machupo (a)Rodents 
South AmericaIsolationCS + vomiting, erythema of the face and,
depending on the aetiology:
periorbital oedema, cervical
adenopathy, pharyngitis
pharyngitis, reddened conjunctivae
oedema of the soft palate, generalised
petechial rash
proteinuria on reagent strip15-30%
OmskTicks 
Europe, AsiaNone 2-5%
Crimean
Congo (a)Livestock/Ticks
Africa, AsiaStrict
isolation5-20%
FHSR
(hantavirus) (a)Rodents 
Asia and EuropeNone < 1%
KyasanurSmall mammals/Ticks 
IndiaNoneCS + headache, muscle pain, prostration2-10%
Rift Valley (a)Livestock/Mosquitoes
AfricaMosquito
netsClinical signs:
isolated fever
SC
encephalitis
retinitis and blindness30-50%
Yellow fever (a)Primates/Mosquitoes
Africa, South AmericaMosquito
netsCS + jaundice, proteinuria on reagent strip,
oliguria, headache10-30%
(a)Viral haemorrhagic fever with epidemic potential.
(b)For more information on geographic distribution of Lassa fever: 
https://www.who.int/emergencies/diseases/lassa-fever/geographic-distribution.png?ua=1
A sample of whole blood must be send to a reference laboratory for serological diagnosis, with a clinical description
of the patient. The sample may also be sent on ﬁlter paper. It is easier to transport, but the small volume of blood
only allows a limited number of aetiologies to be tested.
Protective clothing must be worn while taking or handling the sample (gown, gloves, glasses, mask, etc.).
The sample must be sent in a triple packaging system for Category A infectious substances.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Management
Suspicion of haemorrhagic fever
Isolated case of fever with haemorrhagic symptoms in an endemic area
 
Conﬁrmed cases of Ebola, Marburg, Lassa, Crimean-Congo fevers or epidemics of unknown origin
PLUS
Conﬁrmed cases of Yellow fever or Rift Valley fever
For all patients
Report to the Ministry of Health of the country.
TreatmentIsolation: isolation room (or if not available, use screens/partitions); restrict visitors (if a carer is strictly necessary,
s/he must be protected with gown, gloves, mask).
Standard precautions:
The majority of hospital-acquired infections have occurred due to a lack of respect for these precautions:
Hand washing;
Gloves for patient examination and when touching blood, body ﬂuids, secretions, excretions, mucous
membranes, non-intact skin;
Gowns to protect skin and prevent soiling of clothing during consultations and activities that are likely to
generate splashes or sprays of blood, body ﬂuids, secretions, or excretions;
Surgical mask and goggles, or face shield, to protect mucous membranes of the eyes, nose, and mouth during
activities that may generate splashes of blood, body ﬂuids, secretions, and excretions;
Adequate procedures for the routine cleaning and disinfection of objects and surfaces;
Rubber gloves to handle soiled laundry;
Safe waste management;
Safe injection practices.
Strict isolation in a reserved area separate from other patient areas, with a deﬁned circuit for entrance/exit and
changing room at the entrance/exit; dedicated staff and equipment/supplies; use of disposable material if possible.
Standard precautions (as above)
Droplet precautions AND contact precautions including personal protective equipment (PPE).
The PPE is to be worn systematically prior to entry into isolation area, regardless the tasks to be performed (care,
cleaning, distribution of meals, etc.) and to be removed before leaving the isolation area:
two pairs of gloves,
double gown or coverall suit,
surgical cap or hood, mask, protective glasses,
impermeable apron,
rubber boots.
Disinfection of surfaces, objects, clothing and bedding with chlorine solution; safe handling and on site disposal of
waste and excreta, etc.
In the event of a death, do not wash the body. Prompt and safe burial of the dead as quickly as possible, using a
body bag.
Standard precautions.
Patient under a mosquito net to prevent transmission.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Prevention
 
ReferencesAetiological treatment: ribavirine for Lassa fever and Crimean-Congo fever.
Symptomatic treatment:
Fever: paracetamol (Chapter 1). Acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin) is contra-indicated.
Pain: mild (paracetamol), moderate (tramadol), severe (sublingual morphine): see Pain, Chapter 1.
Dehydration: oral rehydration salts and/or IV rehydration with Ringer lactate, see Dehydration, Chapter 1.
Seizures (Chapter 1).
Vomiting: ondansetron PO
Children 6 months to < 2 years: 2 mg once daily
Children 2 to < 4 years: 2 mg 2 times daily
Children 4 to < 12 years: 4 mg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 12 years and adults: 4 to 8 mg 2 times daily [1] 
For Ebola and Marburg haemorrhagic fevers: invasive procedures must be strictly limited. Health care staff is at risk
of contamination when inserting and maintaining IV lines. An IV line must be well secured so that the patient, often
confused, cannot pull it out.
Vaccination against yellow fever:
Children and adults: 0.5 ml single dose  [2] 
Routine vaccination : children from 9 months of age, along with the measles vaccine.
Mass vaccination campaign during an epidemic: children from 6 months and adults ; for pregnant women, only
administer during an epidemic.
Vaccination against Rift Valley fever: only during an epidemic.
Vector control programmes for known vectors.
Infection control measures are essential in all cases.
1.World Health Organization. Clinical management of patients with viral haemorrhagic fever. A pocket guide for front-line
health workers. Interim emergency guidance for country adaptation, February 2016.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/205570/9789241549608_eng.pdf;jsessionid=15E17DE39631519C2051413DD
CBBC8A7?sequence=1 [Accessed 11 January 2019]
2.Weekly epidemiological record-Relevé épidémiologique hebdomadaire 5 july 2013, 88th year / 5 juillet 2013, 88e année No. 27,
2013, 88, 269–284.
https://www.who.int/wer/2013/wer8827.pdf?ua=1 [Accessed 10 december 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
HIV infection and AIDS
Acquired immune deﬁciency syndrome (AIDS) is the most advanced stage of infection with human immunodeﬁciency
virus (HIV).
Two subtypes of HIV have been identiﬁed. HIV-1 is more widespread than HIV-2, the latter mainly being found in West
Africa. HIV-2 is less virulent and less transmissible than HIV-1.
HIV weakens the immune system by causing a deﬁcit in CD4 T lymphocytes.
Evolution of the disease
 
The World Health Organization (WHO) has proposed a clinical classiﬁcation of HIV infection in 4 stages of severity for
adults and adolescents and for children.
Laboratory
Diagnosis of HIV infection
CD4 lymphocyte counts
CD4 cell depletion is a marker of the progression of immune depression. The level of the CD4 cell count is a predictor
of the development of opportunistic infections or neoplasms and can be used to orient their diagnosis, e.g. cerebral
toxoplasmosis or cryptococcal meningitis appear when the CD4 count is below 100 cells/mm in adults. If clinical
symptoms/signs are present suggesting one of these infections, but the CD4 count is greater than or equal to 200
cells/mm, it is unlikely that that particular infection is present.
Opportunistic infections
It is important to screen for serious opportunistic infections in those at risk (e.g. testing for cryptococcal antigen for all
adults with a CD4 count < 100 cells/mm regardless of symptoms).Primary infection or acute retroviral syndrome: 50 to 70% of newly infected individuals develop during
seroconversion (from 15 days to 3 months post exposure), a viral syndrome with fever, malaise, and
lymphadenopathy.
Asymptomatic HIV infection (after seroconversion): a period of clinical latency, but not viral latency. The time
period for progression from HIV infection to the development of severe immune deﬁciency in western countries is
approximately 10 years. This period appears to be shorter in developing countries.
Symptomatic HIV infection: with progressive destruction of the immune system, common and more severe
diseases occur more frequently, and with higher mortality, in seropositive individuals.
AIDS: this stage corresponds to the development of severe opportunistic infections and neoplasms. From a
biological point of view, AIDS is deﬁned as a CD4 count < 200 cells/mm. Without treatment the disease
progresses rapidly towards death.3
 [1]
The diagnosis is made with serological (detection of antibodies against the virus) or virological (especially in infants)
testing.
Testing should always be done voluntarily with informed consent.
All HIV test results must be strictly conﬁdential in order to avoid discrimination.
The individual should have access to services offering pre-test and post-test counselling, treatment and support.
A diagnosis of HIV infection can be made only after at least 2 different test results (2 different brands) are clearly
positive: the positive result of an initial (highly sensitive) test must be conﬁrmed through use of a second (highly
speciﬁc) test. In areas where HIV prevalence is low, diagnosis is conﬁrmed after 3 positive test results.
3
3
3This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment of HIV infection
Antiretroviral (ARV) treatment
A multi-drug (at least 3) antiretroviral therapy (ART) is the reference treatment. It does not eradicate the virus, but
slows the progression of the disease and improves the patient’s clinical state by reducing viral replication and
consequently increasing the CD4 cell count to levels beyond the threshold of opportunistic infections.
Therapeutic classes
Four major classes ARV are used:
Principles of ARV treatment
Other possible combinations exist which are less commonly used or more difﬁcult to manage.
Criteria for ARV treatment
As a priority ART should be initiated in all patients with WHO clinical stage 3 or 4 and patients with CD4 < 350 /mm.
However, those with higher CD4 counts can initiate ART.
Monitoring of ARV treatment
HIV viral load is an essential tool for monitoring the effectiveness of ARV. CD4 count is useful for identifying severely
immunosuppressed. Other tests such as blood count, tests for liver (ALAT) and renal function (creatinine clearance) are
not essential, but can be useful in detecting adverse effects.
Treatment of opportunistic and other infections
With progressive immunosuppression, HIV-infected patients who are not receiving triple therapy (or patients on ART
but with poor adherence) become increasingly susceptible to infections. For conditions of clinical stages 2 and 3,
standard treatments are usually effective. Patients may beneﬁt from primary prophylaxis against opportunistic
infections (see Primary prophylaxis). Tuberculosis (TB) is the most common serious opportunistic infection. It can be
difﬁcult to diagnose in HIV-infected patients however.
Treatment of pain
Treat all patients for associated pain (see Pain, Chapter 1).
Prevention of HIV infection
Sexual transmission a
NRTI (nucleoside/nucleotide reverse transcriptase inhibitors): zidovudine (AZT), lamivudine (3TC), abacavir (ABC),
tenofovir (TDF), emtricitabine (FTC).
NNRTI (non-nucleoside reverse transcriptase inhibitors): efavirenz (EFV), nevirapine (NVP), etravirine (ETR). HIV-2 is
naturally resistant to NNRTIs.
PI (protease inhibitors): atazanavir (ATV), lopinavir (LPV), ritonavir (RTV), darunavir (DRV).
INI (integrase inhibitors): dolutegravir, raltegravir.
Daily triple therapy must be taken for life to prevent the rapid development of resistance. It is important that the
patient understands this and that adherence to treatment is optimal.
Follow the ART protocols recommended by national HIV program.
The most widely used and easiest regimens to administer are 2 NRTI + 1 NNRTI: e.g. TDF/3TC/EFV.
In the event of treatment failure, all 3 drugs should be replaced with a second-line regimen: 2 other NRTIs + 1 PI.
3
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
The most reliable method of prevention is the use of male or female condoms.
Male circumcision decreases signiﬁcantly the risk of HIV transmission.
Early diagnosis and treatment of sexually transmitted infections is essential as they increase the transmission of HIV
(see Chapter 9).
ART to HIV positive and adherent partner does protect the negative partner from HIV infection.
Occupational transmission
(accidental needle stick injuries or injuries with contaminated objects, contact between a patient’s blood and
unprotected broken skin or mucous membranes)
Prevention is based on use of standard precautions to avoid contamination with soiled material or potentially infected
body ﬂuids.
Post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP): e.g. in the event of rape or occupational accidental exposure to blood, ARV
treatment initiated as soon as possible within 72 hours of exposure for a duration of 1 month may reduce the risk of
infection.
Nosocomial transmission
Prevention of nosocomial HIV infection is based on the rational use of injections and strict respect for hygiene and
sterilization and disinfection procedures for medical material.
For transfusion: strict respect of indications for transfusion and systematic serological screening of the donor’s blood
are the two indispensable precautions in the prevention of HIV transmission through transfusions.
Transmission in injection drug users
Needle and syringe exchange programs with disposable needles and syringes for users can reduce the risk.
Mother-to-child transmission (MTCT)
The global rate of vertical transmission varies from 20 to 40%. The risk of transmission through breast-feeding is
evaluated at approximately 12% and persists for the duration of breast-feeding.
Prevention of opportunistic infections
In the absence of ARV treatment, all HIV-infected individuals become symptomatic and evolve towards AIDS.
However, some opportunistic infections can be prevented.
Primary prophylaxis
For HIV infected patients who have not previously contracted an opportunistic infection, in order to prevent the
development of some opportunistic infections.
 In pregnant women: HIV transmission from mother-to-child may be reduced by ART. The protocol called Option
B+ is the internationally preferred protocol. All HIV-infected pregnant women receive lifelong triple-drug therapy,
regardless of the CD4 count or clinical stage, both for their own health and to prevent transmission to the child. The
most commonly recommended ART is TDF/3TC/EFV or TDF/FTC/EFV. Check national recommendations. In
addition, ARVs are administered to the newborn.
Programs targeting pregnant women also include other preventive measures such as avoiding artiﬁcial rupture of
the membranes and systematic episiotomy.
In breast-feeding women: exclusive breast-feeding for the ﬁrst 6 months of life, introduction of complementary
(solid) foods at 6 months, gradual cessation of breast-feeding to the age of 12 months.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Secondary prophylaxis
For patients who develop a speciﬁc opportunistic infection, in order to prevent recurrence once treatment for the
infection is completed.
 
 Infections Primary prophylaxis
Pneumocystosis
Cerebral toxoplasmosis
Isosporiasis
Various bacterial infections
Malariaco-trimoxazole PO
Children: 50 mg SMX + 10 mg TMP/kg once daily
Adults: 800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP once daily
Infections Secondary prophylaxis Comments
Pneumocystosis
co-trimoxazole PO
Children: 50 mg SMX + 10 mg TMP/kg once
daily
Adults: 800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP once
dailyAlternative
dapsone PO
Children: 2 mg/kg once daily (max. 100 mg
daily)
Adults: 100 mg once daily
Toxoplasmosis Alternative
Adults:
dapsone PO: 200 mg once weekly or 50
mg once daily
+ pyrimethamine PO: 75 mg once weekly
+ folinic acid PO: 25 to 30 mg once
weekly
Isosporiasis –
Penicilliosis
Histoplasmosisitraconazole PO
Adults: 200 mg once daily–
Cryptococcal meningitisﬂuconazole PO
Children: 6 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 200 mg once daily–
Oral or oesophageal
candidiasisﬂuconazole PO
Children: 3 to 6 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 100 to 200 mg once dailyOnly for frequent and severe recurrences
Herpes simplex aciclovir PO
Children under 2 years: 200 mg 2 times daily
Children 2 years and over and adults: 400 mg
2 times dailyOnly for frequent and severe recurrencesThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
SymptomsDeﬁnitions and
aetiologiesDiagnosis Treatment
Diarrhoea
with or without blood
(also see
Chapter 3)Diarrhoea is deﬁned as at
least 3 liquid stools per
day.
Aetiologies:
Parasitic infections
• Isospora belli
• Cryptosporidium
• Microsporidium
• Giardia lamblia
• Entamoeba histolytica
Bacterial infections
• Shigella
• Salmonella enteritis
• Campylobacter
enteritis
Mycobacterial
infections
• Mycobacterium
tuberculosis
(gastrointestinal TB)
• Mycobacterium avium
complex
Helminthiasis
• Strongyloides
stercoralis
Viral infections
• Cytomegalovirus (CMV)
Other causes
• Kaposi sarcoma
• Lymphoma
• Idiopathic (HIV
infection)
• Antiretrovirals
(especially lopinavir and
ritonavir)1. History and clinical
examination
2. Microscopic
examination of stool for
ova and parasites (2 to 3
samples)
Note:
I. belli, Cryptosporidium,
Microsporidium, MAC
and CMV are unlikely if
CD4 count > 200 cells.• Persistent (> 2 weeks) or chronic (>
4 weeks) diarrhoea is often
associated with weight loss and
dehydration.
• Prevention or treatment of
dehydration is critical (Dehydration,
Chapter 1).
• Depending on the results of the
stool examinations: give appropriate
treatment.
• If there is no laboratory support:
Acute bloody diarrhoea
• First-line treatment:
Children: azithromycin PO: 20 mg/kg
once daily for 5 days or
ciproﬂoxacin PO: 15 mg/kg 2 times
daily for 7 days
Adults: ciproﬂoxacin PO: 500 mg 2
times daily for 7 days
• If amoebiasis suspected:
tinidazole or metronidazole PO (
Amoebiasis, Chapter 3).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Non-bloody persistent or chronic
diarrhea
Persistent or chronic diarrhoea
suggests advanced
immunocompromised state. For
patients who qualify for ARVs by
CD4 count (or unknown CD4 count),
ARV initiation is urgent and will
usually resolve symptoms in 14 to 28
days.
• Isospora belli: co-trimoxazole PO
Children: 40 mg SMX + 8 mg TMP/kg
2 times daily for 10 days then 25 mg
SMX + 5 mg TMP/kg 2 times daily
for 3 weeks
Adults: 800 mg SMX + 160 mg TMP
2 times daily for 7 to 10 days then
400 mg SMX + 80 mg TMP 2 times
daily for 3 weeks
• Cryptosporidium: no speciﬁc
treatment in HIV-infected patients
• Microsporidium: albendazole PO
(limited efﬁcacy)
Children: 10 mg/kg 2 times daily
(max. 800 mg daily) for 7 days
Adults: 400 mg 2 times daily for 2 to
4 weeks
• Helminthiasis: albendazole PO for
3 days
Children > 6 months but ≤ 10 kg: 200
mg once daily
Children > 6 months and adults: 400
mg once daily
• Giardiasis: tinidazole or
metronidazole (
Intestinal protozoan infections,
Chapter 6).
• If no improvement (and no contra-
indications such as bloody
diarrhoea), symptomatic treatment
with loperamide PO:
Children < 2 years: contra-indicated
Children 2 to 5 years: 1 mg 3 times
daily
Children 6 to 8 years: 2 mg 2 times
daily
Children > 8 years: 2 mg 3 times daily
Adults: initial dose 4 mg then 2 mg
after each liquid stool (max. 16 mg
daily)This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Nutrition ++++
Children: continue to breastfeed;
increase daily calorie intake:
6-11 months: add 150 kcal daily
12-23 months: add 200 kcal daily
2-5 years: add 250 kcal daily
6-9 years: add 350 kcal daily
10-14 years: add 400 kcal daily
Eliminate fresh milk, give porridge
prepared with rice water or soup or
yoghurts. Give 2.5 ml of oil per meal.
Any child 0-5 years should receive
zinc sulfate (Acute diarrhoea,
Chapter 3).
Adults: increase the calorie and
protein intake (at least 2 g protein/kg
daily). No food is excluded but avoid
raw food, fresh milk and foods high
in ﬁbre. Encourage small, frequent
meals.
Oral and
oesophageal
lesionsFungal infections
• Oral candidiasis: see 
Stomatitis, Chapter 3.
• Oesophageal
candidiasis: pain on
swallowing, dysphagia.
May result in weight loss.
Viral infections
• Oral hairy leukoplakia
(keratosis on the lateral
sides of the tongue due
to the Epstein-Barr virus)
• Oral and oesophageal
herpes
Aphthous ulcersClinical examination is
enough to make a
diagnosis.
Consider all severe oral
candidiasis (if the
pharynx is involved) as
oesophageal candidiasis
even in the absence of
dysphagia.• Mild oral candidiasis
nystatin PO
Children and adults: 100 000 IU (= 1
ml) 4 times daily
or miconazole oral gel
Children 6 months-2 years: 1.25 ml 4
times daily
Children over 2 years and adults: 2.5
ml 4 times daily
The treatment lasts 7 to 14 days.
• Moderate to severe oral
candidiasis and oesophageal
candidiasis
ﬂuconazole PO
Children: 3 to 6 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 50 to 200 mg once daily
up to 400 mg daily if necessary
The treatment lasts 7 to 14 days for
oral candidiasis and 14 to 21 days
for oesophageal candidiasis.
Candidiasis is an indication for
prophylaxis with co-trimoxazole.
• Oral hairy leukoplakia: no treatmentThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
• Oral herpes:
Analgesics (paracetamol, ibuprofen).
For recurrent or extensive forms
affecting the oesophagus, add:
aciclovir PO for 7 days
Children under 2 years: 200 mg 5
times daily
Children 2 years and over and adults:
400 mg 5 times daily
Secondary prophylaxis only for
patients with frequent recurrences.
Respiratory
problems
(also see
Chapter 2)Cough and/or thoracic
pain and/or dyspnoea in a
symptomatic HIV
infected patient.
Aetiologies:
Bacterial infections
• Streptococcus
pneumoniae
• Haemophilus
inﬂuenzae
• Staphylococcus aureus
Mycobacterial
infections
• M. tuberculosis, MAC
Protozoal infections
• Pneumocystis jiroveci
(PCP)
Fungal infections
• Cryptococcus
neoformans
• Histoplasma
capsulatum
• Coccidioides immitis
• Aspergillus spp
• Penicillium marneffei
Viral infections
• CMV
Neoplasms
• Kaposi sarcoma
• Non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma1. History and clinical
examination:
Blood in the sputum?
If fever < 7 days,
dyspnoea: unlikely TB.
If cough > 21 days,
weight loss, thoracic pain
> 15 days, no dyspnoea:
likely TB.
Pulmonary auscultation:
bilateral lobar
pneumonia?
2. If possible:
a) Look for AFB in
sputum
b) Chest x-ray
• PCP: bilateral interstitial
inﬁltrates
• TB: miliary shadowing,
large heart, pleural
effusion, enlarged lymph
nodes inside the chest.
Notes
• MAC, PCP, CMV and
fungal infections are
unlikely in patients with a
CD4 count > 200
cells/mm.
• Staphylococcal
pneumonia is often
associated with a
pyomyositis or an
abscess.3• For the diagnosis and treatment of
upper respiratory tract infections,
particularly pneumonia: see 
Chapter 2.
• If the chest x-ray is consistent with
staphylococcal pneumonia:
Children: see 
Staphylococcal pneumonia, Chapter
2.
Adults: ceftriaxone IM or slow IV 1 g
once daily + cloxacillin IV 2 g every
6 hours
• If the sputum examination is AFB+,
treat for TB.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Others
• Lymphoid interstitial
pneumonia
• Pleural effusion (often
TB)
• Pericardial effusion
(often TB)
• Pneumothorax (may be
due to PCP)• If the sputum examination is
negative and the chest x-ray is
consistent with PCP:
co-trimoxazole PO for 21 days
Children: 50 mg SMX + 10 mg
TMP/kg 2 times daily
Adults: 1600 SMX + 320 TMP 3
times daily
Note: the symptoms may become
worse during the ﬁrst phase of
treatment, effectiveness can only be
evaluated after one week of
treatment.
Add prednisolone PO for patients
with severe PCP with hypoxia:
Children: start with 2 mg/kg daily
then decrease the dose following
the adult example
Adults: 40 mg 2 times daily for 5
days, then 40 mg once daily for 5
days then 20 mg once daily for 10
days
Secondary prophylaxis is
recommended.
• Fungal infections (cryptococcosis,
penicilliosis, histoplasmosis):
Adults: amphotericin B IV: 0.7 to 1
mg/kg once daily for 2 weeks
(cryptococcosis, penicilliosis) or 1 to
2 weeks (histoplasmosis), then:
ﬂuconazole PO: 400 mg daily for 8
weeks (cryptococcosis)
itraconazole PO: 200 mg 2 times
daily for 10 weeks (penicilliosis)
itraconazole PO: 200 mg 3 times
daily for 3 days then 200 to 400 mg
daily for 12 weeks (histoplasmosis)
Secondary prophylaxis is
recommended.
Lymphadenopathy Enlarged lymph nodes in
a symptomatic HIV-
infected patient1. Clinical examination:
look for a local cause
(skin or dental infection
etc.); TB or syphilis.• Treat according to the aetiology or
empirical treatment with, for
example doxycycline PO.
• TB: see the guide Tuberculosis,
MSF.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Persistent generalised
lymphadenopathy (PGL):
• 2 or more extra-inguinal
sites
• lymph nodes > 1.5 cm
• enlarged for 3 or more
months PGL is usually
due to HIV infection.
Aetiologies:
HIV infection
Infections
• TB
• Syphilis
• Histoplasmosis
• Toxoplasmosis
• CMV
Neoplasms
• Kaposi sarcoma
• Lymphoma2. Suspected TB: lymph
node aspiration, look for
AFB, chest x-ray
Note: in HIV infected
patients, TB is often
extrapulmonary.
3. Suspected syphilis:
serology
4. If all examinations are
negative: biopsy is useful
to exclude lymphoma,
Kaposi’s sarcoma and
fungal or mycobacterial
infections (see notes for
patients in stage 1).• Early syphilis:
benzathine benzylpenicillin IM
Adults: 2.4 MIU single dose (1.2 MIU
in each buttock)
or, if not available:
azithromycin PO
Adults: 2 g single dose
Note: in patients in stage 1, no
further investigation (other than 1, 2
and 3 in this table) or treatment are
required.
Skin lesions
(also see
Chapter 4)Bacterial infections
• Furunculosis
• Impetigo and pyoderma
• Axillary hidradenitis
• Pyomyositis
• Syphilis
Viral infections
• Herpes zoster
• Herpes simplex
• Genital warts
• Molluscum
contagiosum
Fungal infections
• Candidiasis,
dermatophytoses and
deep mycoses
(penicilliosis,
cryptococcosis,
histoplasmosis, etc.)
Neoplasms
• Kaposi sarcoma  Bacterial infections
• Furunculosis, impetigo, chronic
folliculitis: see 
Bacterial skin infections, Chapter 4.
• Suppurative axillary hidradenitis:
local treatment + doxycycline PO:
200 mg once daily for 6 weeks (in
adults)
• Pyomyositis: antibiotics and
surgical drainage, see Pyomyositis,
Chapter 10.
• Primary and secondary syphilis: see
Genital ulcers, Chapter 9.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Other skin infections
• Chronic prurigo or
urticaria
• Severe seborrhoeic
dermatitis
• Psoriasis
• Scabies
• Diffuse cutaneous
xerosis
Rash caused by
medication
Bed soresViral infections
• Herpes zoster: see 
Herpes simplex and herpes zoster,
Chapter 4.
For necrotic, extensive forms,
eruption on the face, ophthalmic
zoster, add aciclovir within 48 hours
of the onset of lesions:
Children (IV route): 5 to 10 mg/kg
every 8 hours for 7 days
Adults (oral route): 800 mg 5 times
daily for 7 days
• Herpes simplex: see 
Herpes simplex and herpes zoster,
Chapter 4.
• Genital warts: see Venereal warts,
Chapter 9.
Fungal infections
• Candidiasis: 2% miconazole
cream, one application 2 times daily
• Dermatophytoses: see 
Superﬁcial fungal infections, Chapter
4.
Treatment of Kaposi sarcoma (KS)
• Start promptly ART.
• KS tumours with oedema or
ulceration or presence of extensive
oral or gastrointestinal or pulmonary
KS +/- systemic illness:
chemotherapy
Other skin infections
• Prurigo, urticaria: see 
Other skin disorders, Chapter 4.
• Seborrhoeic dermatitis: Whitﬁeld’s
ointment or 2% miconazole, one
application 2 times daily. For severe
inﬂammation, use a topical
corticosteroid in combination with
miconazole.
• Xerosis: zinc oxide ointment or
calamine lotion
• Psoriasis: corticosteroids and
zinc oxide ointment
• Scabies: local treatment. For
crusted or profuse scabies, add
ivermectin PO (see Scabies,
Chapter 4).
Neurological Aetiologies: History and clinical Positive malaria test: see Malaria,This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
disorders in adults Infections
• TB meningitis
• Cryptococcal meningitis
• Cerebral toxoplasmosis
• Neurosyphilis
• CMV encephalitis
• HIV encephalopathy
• Progressive multifocal
leuko- encephalopathy
• Cerebral malaria
Neoplasms
• Primary CNS lymphoma
Common causes of
headache unrelated to
HIV infection:
sometimes more
frequent in HIV infected
patients (sinusitis,
problems with
accommodation etc.)
Adverse effects of
ARVsexamination:
• Change in mental state
• Focal deﬁcits
• Seizures
• Signs of meningeal
irritation
• Raised intercranial
pressure
• Motor problems, ataxia
In settings where
cryptococcal infection is
common, screen all
adults with CD4 < 100
prior to initiation of ART,
using a rapid CrAg test
on serum or plasma.
In endemic areas: check
for malaria (if febrile).
Lumbar puncture (LP) if
not contra-indicated.
Elements in favour of
neurosyphilis:
• VDRL positive in blood
and/or CSF
• cells in the CSF
• high protein in the CSFChapter 6.
If focal signs, treat for
toxoplasmosis:
co-trimoxazole PO: 25 mg SMX + 5
mg TMP/kg 2 times daily for 4 to 6
weeks
or
pyrimethamine PO: 100 mg morning
and evening on D1, then 75 to 100
mg daily + sulfadiazine PO: 2 g 2 to
3 times daily + folinic acid PO: 15
mg once daily, for 6 weeks
A secondary prophylaxis is
recommended.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
If the LP is positive:
• Bacterial meningitis: see Chapter 7.
• TB meningitis: see the guide 
Tuberculosis, MSF.
• Cryptococcal meningitis:
amphotericin B IV: 1 mg/kg once
daily + ﬂucytosine PO: 25 mg/kg 4
times daily for 1 week
then ﬂuconazole PO: 1200 mg once
daily for 1 week then 800 mg once
daily for 8 weeks
or, if not available
amphotericin B IV: 1 mg/kg once
daily + ﬂuconazole PO: 1200 mg
once daily for 2 weeks
then ﬂuconazole PO alone: 800 mg
once daily for 8 weeks
or
ﬂuconazole PO: 1200 mg once daily
+ ﬂucytosine PO: 25 mg/kg 4 times
daily for 2 weeks
then ﬂuconazole PO alone: 800 mg
once daily for 8 weeks
During the induction phase: give
ﬂuconazole IV (same doses) if the
patient cannot take oral treatment;
liposomal amphotericin B (3 mg/kg
daily 2 weeks) may be used instead
of conventional amphotericin B in
case of renal impairment.
A secondary prophylaxis is
recommended.
Note: intracranial pressure (ICP) is
often raised in cryptococcal
meningitis. To lower ICP, repeated
‘therapeutic’ punctures to drain CSF
may be necessary at the beginning
of treatment.
Neurosyphilis:
benzylpenicillin IV: 2 to 4 MIU (1.2
to 2.4 g) every 4 hours for 14 days
or ceftriaxone IV or IM: 2 g once
daily for 10 to 14 days
Headache of unknown origin:
symptomatic treatment starting with
a step 1 analgesic (see Pain,
Chapter 1). [2] 
Neurological Aetiologies: Good history taking as Positive malaria test: see Malaria,This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
disorders in
children• Bacterial meningitis
• TB meningitis
• Cryptococcal meningitis
• Cerebral toxoplasmosis
• CMV meningo-
encephalitis
• Cerebral malariaonly patients with acute
episodes beneﬁt from
speciﬁc aetiological
treatment (seizures,
meningeal syndrome,
focal signs).
In endemic areas, check
for malaria (if febrile).
Lumbar puncture (LP) if
not contra-indicated.Chapter 6.
If LP is not possible:
• Treat for bacterial meningitis if
patient febrile and/or meningeal
syndrome (see Chapter 7).
• If focal signs, treat for
toxoplasmosis:
co-trimoxazole PO: 25 mg SMX + 5
mg TMP/kg 2 times daily for 4 to 6
weeks
or 
pyrimethamine PO: 1 mg/kg 2 times
daily for 2 days then 1 mg/kg once
daily + sulfadiazine PO: 40 mg/kg 2
times daily + folinic acid PO: 10 mg
once daily, for 8 weeks
A secondary prophylaxis is
recommended.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
If the LP is positive:
• Bacterial meningitis: see Chapter 7.
• TB meningitis: see the guide 
Tuberculosis, MSF.
• Cryptococcal meningitis (in order of
preference):
amphotericin B IV: 1 mg/kg once
daily + ﬂucytosine PO: 25 mg/kg 4
times daily for 1 week then
ﬂuconazole PO: 12 mg/kg once
daily (max. 800 mg daily) for 1 week
then 6-12 mg/kg once daily (max.
800 mg daily) for 8 weeks
or, if not available
amphotericin B IV: 1 mg/kg once
daily + ﬂuconazole PO: 12 mg/kg
once daily (max. 800 mg daily) for 2
weeks then ﬂuconazole PO alone:
6-12 mg/kg once daily for 8 weeks
(max. 800 mg daily)
or
ﬂuconazole PO: 12 mg/kg once
daily (max. 800 mg daily) +
ﬂucytosine PO: 25 mg/kg 4 times
daily for 2 weeks then ﬂuconazole
PO alone: 6-12 mg/kg once daily
(max. 800 mg daily) for 8 weeks
During the induction phase: give
ﬂuconazole IV (same doses) if the
child cannot take oral treatment;
liposomal amphotericin B (3 mg/kg
daily, 2 weeks) may be used instead
of conventional amphotericin B in
case of renal impairment.
A secondary prophylaxis is
recommended. [2] 
Persistent or
recurrent feverTemperature > 38 °C,
chronic (lasting more than
5 days) or recurrent
(multiple episodes in a
period of more than 5
days)
Aetiologies:1. History and clinical
examination: look for a
ENT or urinary infection,
TB, skin infection,
enlarged lymph nodes
etc.
2. In endemic areas,
check for malaria.
3. Suspected TB: look
for AFB.Positive malaria test: see Malaria,
Chapter 6.
If testing is not available: in endemic
areas, treat malaria.
Suspected meningitis: treat
according to the results of the LP.
If LP is not available, treat for 
bacterial meningitis, see Chapter 7.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
ReferencesInfections
• Common childhood
diseases
• Severe bacterial
infections (TB,
pneumonia, typhoid fever,
septicaemia, meningitis,
endocarditis, etc.)
• Occult bacterial
infections (sinusitis, otitis,
urinary tract infections)
• Opportunistic infections
(TB, mycosis,
toxoplasmosis)
• Malaria
Neoplasms
• Non-Hodgkin’s
lymphoma
HIV infection
Fever caused by
medication4. Chest x-ray, CBC,
blood cultures, urinalysis,
stool culture, serology,
lumbar puncture (LP).
If the child is under
treatment, consider
adverse effects of
medication.Identiﬁed or suspected focus of
infection:
• ENT: see Chapter 2; urinary: see 
Chapter 9, etc.
• TB: see the guide Tuberculosis,
MSF.
Footnotes
(a)For more information: The use of antiretroviral drugs for treating and preventing HIV infection. Recommendations for a
public health approach. World Health Organization, second edition, 2016.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/208825/1/9789241549684_eng.pdf?ua=1
1.World Health Organization. WHO case deﬁnitions of HIV for surveillance and revised clinical staging and immunological
classiﬁcation de HIV-related disease in adults and children, 2007.
http://www.who.int/hiv/pub/guidelines/HIVstaging150307.pdf [Accessed 17 May 2018]
2.Word Health Organization. Guidelines for the diagnosis, prevention, and management of cryptococcal disease in HIV-
infected adults, adolescents and children, Geneva, 2018.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/260399/9789241550277-eng.pdf?sequence=1 [Accessed 17 May 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 9: Genito-urinary diseases
Nephrotic syndrome in children
Urolithiasis
Acute cystitis
Acute pyelonephritis
Acute prostatitis
Genital infections
Urethral discharge
Abnormal vaginal discharge
Genital ulcers
Lower abdominal pain in women
Upper genital tract infections (UGTI)
Venereal warts
Major genital infections (summary)
Abnormal uterine bleeding (in the absence of pregnancy)
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Nephrotic syndrome in children
Nephrotic syndrome (NS) is characterized by the presence of oedema, heavy proteinuria, hypoalbuminemia, and
hyperlipidaemia.
Primary or idiopathic NS is the most common cause of NS in children between 1 and 10 years. It usually responds to
corticosteroids.
Secondary NS is associated with infectious diseases (e.g. post-infectious glomerulonephritis, endocarditis, hepatitis B
and C, HIV infection, malaria, and schistosomiasis) and may respond to treatment of the underlying cause.
 
Children with NS are at increased risk of thromboembolism, severe bacterial infections (in particular, due to S.
pneumoniae) and malnutrition. Untreated NS may progress to renal failure.
Clinical features
As oedema worsens, it may localize to the back or genitals, or become generalized with ascites and pleural
effusions.
 
 
Laboratory
Treatment
 
 Typically, the child presents with soft, pitting and painless oedema, which varies in location based on position and
activity. Upon awaking, the child has periorbital or facial oedema, which over the day decreases as oedema of the
legs increases.
This oedema should be differentiated from the oedema of severe acute malnutrition (SAM): in SAM, the child
presents with bilateral pitting oedema of the feet and lower legs that does not vary with position. Oedema extends
upwards to hands and face in severe cases. It is usually associated with typical skin and hair changes (see
Kwashiorkor: Severe acute malnutrition, Chapter 1).
Once SAM is excluded, the following two criteria must be met to make a clinical diagnosis of primary NS:
Presence of heavy proteinuria,
and
Absence of associated infections: see Hepatitis B and C and HIV infection (Chapter 8), Malaria and
Schistosomiases (Chapter 6).
Urine
Measure protein with urinary dipstick on three separate voided urine samples (ﬁrst voided urine if possible). In NS,
proteinuria is equal or greater than +++ or equal or greater than 300 mg/dl or 30 g/litre. NS is excluded if heavy
proteinuria is not consistently present. a 
In case of macroscopic haematuria, or microscopic haematuria ≥ +, consider glomerulonephritis.
Blood tests (if available)
Serum albumin concentration less than 30 g/litre and hyperlipidaemia.
Blood urea nitrogen (BUN) and creatinine most often in the normal range.
Perform all necessary laboratory tests to exclude secondary NS.
Hospitalize the child for initial therapy.
Corticosteroids (prednisolone or prednisone) are indicated in primary NS.
Before starting corticosteroid treatment:
Treat any concomitant acute infections such as pneumonia, peritonitis, sepsis, pharyngitis, or cellulitis.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
See algorithm below. Total length of initial treatment is 2 to 4 months.
 
 
Treat infections as soon as they appear but do not routinely give prophylactic antibiotics.
 
Management of complicationsExclude active tuberculosis and/or start antituberculous treatment.
Corticosteroid treatment
Nutrition, ﬂuid intake, nursing and follow-up
No salt-added diet.
Do not restrict ﬂuids (risk of thrombosis due to hypercoagulability). If oedema is very severe, ﬂuids may initially
be restricted (e.g. 75% of usual intake) while monitoring urine output.
Encourage child to walk and play to prevent thromboembolism.
Discharge child when stable, follow-up at least monthly, more frequently if indicated, weight and urine dipstick at
each visit.
Instruct the parent to continue no salt-added diet and to seek medical advice in case of fever, abdominal pain,
respiratory distress or signs of thromboembolism.
Management of infections
Immunization
Children under 5 years: check that the child has received all EPI vaccines including Haemophilus inﬂuenzae type
B, conjugated pneumococcal vaccine and (if in an endemic area) meningococcal A conjugate vaccine. If not,
administer catch-up vaccines.
Children over 5 years: check that the child has received tetanus, measles, pneumococcal conjugate and (if in an
endemic area) meningococcal A conjugate vaccine. If not, administer catch-up vaccines.
Intravascular volume depletion potentially leading to shock, present despite oedematous appearanceThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Signs include decreased urine output with any one of the following: capillary reﬁll ≥ 3 seconds, poor skin
perfusion/mottling, cold extremities, low blood pressure.
If signs are present, administer human albumin 5% IV: 1 g/kg. If albumin is not available, administer Ringer
lactate or 0.9% sodium chloride: 10 ml/kg over 30 minutes.
If signs of shock are present, see Shock, Chapter 1.
 
This is the only situation in which diuretics should be used and only if there are no signs of intravascular volume
depletion or after hypovolaemia has been corrected:
furosemide PO: 0.5 mg/kg 2 times daily
If not effective, discontinue furosemide. If creatinine is normal, administer spironolactone PO: 1 mg/kg 2 times
daily. The dose can be increased to 9 mg/kg daily in resistant cases of ascites.
While on diuretics, monitor for dehydration, thromboembolism and hypokalaemia.
 
Specialized advice and management (including further investigations such as renal biopsy) are required:
 
In case of steroid-resistant NS, when referral is impossible and as a last resort, the following palliative measure may
reduce proteinuria and delay renal failure:
enalapril PO: 0.1 to 0.3 mg/kg 2 times daily (start with the lowest dose and increase gradually if necessary until
reduction of proteinuria). If available, monitor for hyperkalaemia.
This is a palliative measure and the prognosis for steroid-resistant NS is poor in the absence of specialized treatment.
 Respiratory distress due to severe oedema (rare)
In children less than 1 year or more than 10 years,
In case of steroid resistant NS,
 In case of mixed nephrotic and nephritic clinical picture.
Footnotes
(a)Nephrotic range proteinuria in children is deﬁned as urinary protein excretion greater than 50 mg/kg daily. Quantitative
measurement of protein excretion is normally based on a timed 24-hour urine collection. However, if this test cannot be
performed, urine dipstick measurements can be substituted.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Urolithiasis
Last updated: December 2020
 
Urolithiasis is the formation and passage of calculi (stones) in the urinary tract.
Clinical features
 
Note: if available, ultrasound may demonstrate calculi and hydronephrosis.
Treatment
 
Note: the majority of calculi pass spontaneously. If there are signs of signiﬁcant renal dysfunction or secondary
infection that does not improve with antibiotic treatment, consider surgical referral.Many calculi do not cause symptoms; they may be found incidentally through radiology exams.
Symptoms arise when calculi cause partial or complete obstruction and/or infection:
Intermittent, acute ﬂank to pelvic pain (renal colic). Pain can be severe and typically causes nausea and vomiting.
Abdomen/ﬂank may be tender to palpation. Patients are typically restless, ﬁnding no comfortable position.
Haematuria and/or gravel (calculi) passed in urine.
Fever and signs of pyelonephritis if secondary infection develops (see Acute pyelonephritis, Chapter 9).
Encourage the patient to drink ﬂuids.
Administer analgesics according to the intensity of pain (see Pain, Chapter 1).
In case of secondary infection: antibiotic treatment as for pyelonephritis. The effectiveness will depend on the
passage of calculi.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute cystitis
Last updated: July 2021
 
Cystitis is an infection of the bladder and urethra that affects mainly women and girls from 2 years of age. Escherichia
coli is the causative pathogen in at least 70% of cases. Other pathogens include Proteus mirabilis, Enterococcus sp,
Klebsiella sp and in young women, Staphylococcus saprophyticus.
Clinical features
AND
 
It is essential to rule out pyelonephritis.
The symptom 'burning pain on urination' alone is insufﬁcient to make the diagnosis. See Abnormal vaginal discharge.
Investigations 
Perform dipstick analysis for nitrites (which indicate the presence of enterobacteria) and leukocytes (which indicate
an inﬂammation) in the urine.
 
When urine microscopy is not feasible, an empirical antibiotherapy should be administered to patients with typical
signs of cystitis and positive dipstick urinalysis (leukocytes and/or nitrites).
 
Note: aside of these results, in areas where urinary schistosomiasis is endemic, consider schistosomiasis in patients
with macroscopic haematuria or microscopic haematuria detected by dipstick test, especially in children from 5 to 15
years, even if the patient may suffer from concomitant bacterial cystitis.
 
Treatment
Cystitis in girls ≥ 2 years
ceﬁxime PO: 8 mg/kg once daily for 3 days
or
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO (dose expressed in amoxicillin): 12.5 mg/kg 2 times daily for 3 days
Cystitis in young, nonpregnant women 
fosfomycin-trometamol PO: 3 g single dose
or
nitrofurantoin PO: 100 mg 3 times daily for 5 days 
 Burning pain on urination and urinary urgency and frequency; in children: crying when passing urine; involuntary loss of
urine.
No fever (or mild fever), no ﬂank pain; no systemic signs and symptoms in children.
Urine dipstick test:
If dipstick analysis is positive for nitrites and/or leukocytes, a urinary infection is likely. 
In women, if dipstick analysis is negative for both nitrites and leukocytes, a urinary infection is excluded. 
Microscopy/culture: when a dipstick analysis is positive, it is recommended to carry out urine microscopy/culture in
order to conﬁrm the infection and identify the causative pathogen, particularly in children and pregnant women.
POCUS: in cases of recurrent cystitis, perform FAST views to evaluate for signs of urinary tract pathologies.   a 
If dipstick analysis is positive for both nitrites and leukocytes:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Cystitis in pregnant or lactating women
fosfomycin-trometamol PO: 3 g single dose
or
nitrofurantoin PO (contraindicated in the last month of pregnancy): 100 mg 3 times daily for 7 days 
or 
ceﬁxime PO: 200 mg 2 times daily for 5 days
 If dipstick analysis is negative for nitrites but positive for leukocytes, the infection may be due to S. saprophyticus.
Fosfomycin is not active against this pathogen. Use nitrofurantoin as above.
Whatever the antibiotic used, symptoms may persist for 2 to 3 days despite adequate treatment.
In the event of treatment failure (or recurrent cystitis i.e. > 3-4 episodes per year), ciproﬂoxacin PO: 500 mg 2
times daily for 3 days
For patients with recurrent cystitis, consider bladder stones, urinary schistosomiasis, urinary tuberculosis or
gonorrhoea (examine the partner).
Footnotes
(a)POCUS should only be performed and interpreted by trained clinicians.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute pyelonephritis
Pyelonephritis is an infection of the renal parenchyma, more common in women than in men.
The pathogens causing pyelonephritis are the same as those causing cystitis (see Acute cystitis, Chapter 9).
Pyelonephritis is potentially severe, especially in pregnant women, neonates and infants.
Management depends on the presence of signs of severity or complications or risk of complications.
Clinical features
Neonates and infant
 
In practice, a urinary tract infection should be suspected in children with unexplained fever or septic syndrome with no
obvious focus of infection.
Older children and adults
AND
Laboratory
See Acute cystitis, Chapter 9.
Treatment
 
 Symptoms are not speciﬁc: fever, irritability, vomiting, poor oral intake. Palpation of the lower abdomen may show
abdominal tenderness. The absence of fever does not rule out the diagnosis. On the other hand, fever –with no
obvious cause– may be the only manifestation.
Neonates may present with fever or hypothermia, altered general condition, altered conscious state, pale/grey
colour, shock.
Signs of cystitis (burning pain on urination and urinary urgency and frequency, etc.)
Fever > 38 °C and unilateral ﬂank pain or abdominal tenderness
Nausea and/or vomiting are common.
Criteria for hospital admission:
Patients at risk of complications: children, pregnant women, men, functional or structural abnormality of the
urinary tract (lithiasis, malformation, etc.), severe immunodeﬁciency;  a 
Patients with complicated pyelonephritis: urinary tract obstruction, renal abscess, emphysematous
pyelonephritis in diabetic patients;
Patients with signs of severe infection: sepsis (infection with signs of organ dysfunction) and septic shock,
dehydration or nausea/vomiting preventing hydration and oral treatment;
No clinical improvement 24 hours after the start of oral antibiotherapy in women treated as outpatients. 
Antibiotherapy in children
Children under one month 
ampicillin slow IV (3 minutes) for 7 to 10 days
Children 0 to 7 days (< 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 12 hours
Children 0 to 7 days (≥ 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
Children 8 days to < 1 month: 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
+ gentamicin slow IV (3 minutes) for 5 days
Children 0 to 7 days (< 2 kg): 3 mg/kg once dailyThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 
 
 
 
Preferably use the combination ampicillin + gentamicin to cover enterococci. 
Pyelonephritis with abscess formation or emphysematous pyelonephritis may require longer antibiotherapy.
 
 Children 0 to 7 days (≥ 2 kg): 5 mg/kg once daily
Children 8 days to < 1 month: 5 mg/kg once daily
or
cefotaxime slow IV (3 minutes) for 7 to 10 days
Children 0 to 7 days (< 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 12 hours
Children 0 to 7 days (≥ 2 kg): 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
Children 8 days to < 1 month: 50 mg/kg every 8 hours
Children one month and over
ceftriaxone IM or slow IV(3 minutes): 50 mg/kg once daily until the child's condition improves (at least 3 days)
then change to oral route to complete 10 days of treatment with:
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO (dose expressed in amoxicillin)
Children < 40 kg: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily 
Children ≥ 40 kg:
Ratio 8:1: 2000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 1750 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times daily)  b  
Antibiotherapy in adults [1]
Uncomplicated pyelonephritis 
ceftriaxone IM: 1 g single dose or gentamicin IM: 5 mg/kg single dose
+
ciproﬂoxacin PO: 500 mg 2 times daily for 7 days
or
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO (dose expressed in amoxicillin) for 10 to 14 days
Ratio 8:1: 2000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 2 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 1750 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 2 times daily) 
or
ceﬁxime PO: 200 mg 2 times daily or 400 mg once daily for 10 to 14 days
Pyelonephritis with criteria for hospital admission
ampicillin slow IV (3 minutes): 2 g every 6 hours for at least 3 days + gentamicin IM: 5 mg/kg once daily for 3
days
then change to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO (or another antibiotic depending on the antibiotic susceptibility
test) to complete 10 to 14 days of treatment
or
ceftriaxone IV: 1 g once daily for at least 3 days + gentamicin IM: 5 mg/kg once daily for 3 days in the event
of sepsis then change to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO (or another antibiotic depending on the antibiotic
susceptibility test) to complete 10 to 14 days of treatment b  
Treatment of fever and pain: do not administer NSAID (Fever, Chapter 1).
Maintain proper hydration (1.5 litres daily in adults), especially in children (risk of dehydration); treat dehydration if
present (see Dehydration, Chapter 1).
Management of septic shock if needed.
Footnotes
(a)Pyelonephritis is rare in men; bacterial prostatitis should be suspected in the event of febrile urinary tract infection.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
References(b)The solvent of ceftriaxone for IM injection contains lidocaine. Ceftriaxone reconstituted using this solvent must never be
administered by IV route. For IV administration, water for injection must always be used.
1.Gupta K, Hooton TM, Naber KG, Wullt B, Colgan R, Miller LG, Moran GJ, Nicolle LE, Raz R, Schaeffer AJ, Soper DE, Infectious
Diseases Society of America, European Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. International clinical practice
guidelines for the treatment of acute uncomplicated cystitis and pyelonephritis in women: A 2010 update by the Infectious
Diseases Society of America and the European Society for Microbiology and Infectious Diseases. Clin Infect Dis.
2011;52(5):e103. 
https://academic.oup.com/cid/article/52/5/e103/388285 [Accessed 17 December 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute prostatitis
Prostatitis is an acute bacterial infection of the prostate.
The most common causative pathogen is Escherichia coli. Other pathogens include Proteus
mirabilis, Klebsiella sp, Pseudomonas aeruginosa and Enterococcus sp.
Progression to chronic prostatitis is possible.
Clinical features
 
On examination:
Treatment
 
ReferencesFever (often high) and chills.
Signs of cystitis (burning on urination and urinary frequency).
Perineal, urethral, penile or rectal pain.
Urinary retention.
Very painful digital rectal examination. Fluctuant mass in case of prostatic abscess.
Leukocyturia, pyuria, possible macroscopic haematuria.
Antibiotic therapy:
ciproﬂoxacin PO: 500 mg 2 times daily for 14 days then review the patient. Stop treatment if signs and symptoms
have completely resolved. If signs and symptoms are ongoing continue the same treatment for a further 14 days. [1]
Symptomatic treatment:
Ensure adequate hydration (1.5 litres daily).
Treat fever (Chapter 1) and pain (Chapter 1).
Refer to a surgeon in case of suspected prostatic abscess.
1.National Institute for Health and Care Excellence. NICE guideline [NG110] Prostatitis (acute): antimicrobial prescribing, 2018.
https://www.nice.org.uk/guidance/ng110/resources/visual-summary-pdf-6544018477 [Accessed 4 March 2020]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Genital infections
Last updated: August 2021
 
The diagnosis and treatment of genital infections (GI) present several difﬁculties: clinical features are not speciﬁc;
many infections are asymptomatic; laboratory tests available in the ﬁeld are not always reliable; mixed infections are
common; sexual partners need to be treated simultaneously in case of sexually transmitted infectionsand the risk of
recurrence or treatment failure is increased in HIV-infected patients.
Thus, the WHO has introduced the syndromic management of GI and developed standardised case management
ﬂowcharts: based on the identiﬁcation of consistent groups of signs and symptoms (syndromes), patients are treated
for the pathogens/infectionsthat may cause each syndrome.
 
 
Basic principles of GI management
Special situation: sexual violence a  
 b  
Look for a GI if a patient complains of: See
Urethral discharge
Painful or difﬁcult urination (dysuria)Urethral discharge
Abnormal vaginal discharge
Vulvar itching/burning
Pain with intercourse (dyspareunia)
Painful or difﬁcult urination (dysuria)Abnormal vaginal discharge
Genital blisters or sores
Burning sensation in the vulva or perineumGenital ulcers
Skin growths in the genital (or anal) area Venereal warts
Lower abdominal pain (in women) Lower abdominal pain
Upper genital tract infections
The patient can be effectively treated without laboratory testing. Some tests may help in diagnosing vaginal and
urethral discharge, but they should never delay treatment (results should be available within one hour).
The patient should be treated at his/her ﬁrst encounter with the health care provider (no patient should be sent
home without treatment, e.g. while waiting for laboratory results).
Single dose regimens are preferred when indicated.
In the case of urethral discharge, abnormal vaginal discharge (except candidiasis), genital ulcers (except herpes) and
sexually transmitted upper genital tract infection, the sexual partner should receive a treatment. In the case of
candidiasis, genital herpes and venereal warts, the partner is treated only if symptomatic.
Patients with sexually transmitted infections should receive information on their disease(s) and treatment and be
counselled on risk reduction and HIV testing. Condoms should be provided for the duration of treatment.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Taking into consideration the physical, psychological, legal and social consequences of sexual violence, medical
care is not limited to the diagnosis and treatment of genital lesions or infections.
Care includes listening to the victim’s story, a complete physical examination, laboratory tests if available, and
completion of a medical certiﬁcate.
During the consultation, prophylactic or curative treatments must be proposed to the patient.
 
 
 
Mental health care is necessary irrespective of any delay between the event and the patient arriving for a consultation.
Care is based on immediate attention (one-on-one reception and listening) and if necessary, follow-up care with a view
to detecting and treating any psychological and/or psychiatric sequelae (anxiety, depression, post-traumatic stress
disorder, etc.). See Chapter 11.
 Prophylactic treatment:
priority is given to:
a) the risk of HIV transmission. Start antiretroviral therapy as early as possible if the patient is seen within 48-
72 hours after exposure (see HIV infection and AIDS, Chapter 8);
b) the risk of pregnancy resulting from rape. Administer emergency contraception as soon as possible, ideally
within 72 hours after the rape:
levonorgestrel PO, one 1.5 mg tablet single dose (including in women receiving HIV post-exposure
prophylaxis); double the dose (3 mg) only if the patient was already taking an enzyme-inducing drug (e.g.
rifampicin, carbamazepine, certain antiretrovirals) before the rape;
or ulipristal PO, one 30 mg tablet single dose;
or a copper intrauterine device (except in case of active genital infection); c  
prevention of sexually transmitted infections: a single dose of azithromycin PO 2 g + ceftriaxone IM 500 mg
(or, if ceftriaxone is not available, ceﬁxime PO 400 mg). If necessary, treatment of trichomoniasis may be
started later than the other treatments (tinidazole or metronidazole PO, 2 g single dose);
tetanus prophylaxis and/or vaccination (see Tetanus, Chapter 7) if there are any wounds;
vaccination against hepatitis B (accelerated vaccination schedule, see Viral hepatitis, Chapter 8).
Curative treatment:
of any related pathologies/infections if the assault is not recent.
of wounds,
Footnotes
(a)GI may be sexually transmitted (e.g. gonorrhoea, chlamydia) or not (e.g. most cases of candidiasis).
(b)Keep in mind that in Schistosoma haematobium endemic areas, genital symptoms may also be due to, or associated with,
genitourinary schistosomiasis (see Schistosomiasis, Chapter 6).
(c)Nevertheless, between 72 and 120 hours (5 days) after the rape, emergency contraception is still sufﬁciently effective to be
administered.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Urethral discharge
Last updated: August 2022
 
Urethral discharge is seen almost exclusively in men. The principal causative organisms are Neisseria gonorrhoeae
(gonorrhoea) and Chlamydia trachomatis (chlamydia).
Abnormal discharge should be conﬁrmed by performing a clinical examination. In males, the urethra should be milked
gently if no discharge is visible. Furthermore, speciﬁcally check for urethral discharge in patients complaining of painful
or difﬁcult urination (dysuria).
Case management
Laboratory
Treatment of the patient a 
C. trachomatis cannot easily be identiﬁed in a ﬁeld laboratory. In the absence of validated rapid diagnostic tests,
the treatment is empiric.
In men, a methylene blue or Gram stained smear from a urethral swab may be used to detect gonococci (Gram
negative intracellular diplococci).
In women: same treatment as cervicitis.
In men:
If microscopy of a urethral smear has been performed: in the absence of gonococci, treat for chlamydia alone;
in the presence of gonococci, treat for chlamydia AND gonorrhoea.
When no laboratory is available, treat for chlamydia AND gonorrhoea as below:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
If urethral discharge persists or reappears after 7 days:
Treatment of the partner
The sexual partner receives the same treatment as the patient, whether or not symptoms are present.
 Treatment for chlamydia   Treatment for gonorrhoea
azithromycin PO: 1 g single dose
or
doxycycline PO: 100 mg 2 times daily for
7 daysPLUS ceftriaxone IM: 500 mg single dose
or, if ceftriaxone is not available,
ceﬁxime PO: 400 mg single dose
Verify that the patient has received an effective treatment (i.e. one of the combinations above).
Gonococcal resistance is a possibility if another treatment (e.g. co-trimoxazole or kanamycin) has been
administered: re-treat for gonorrhoea as above (chlamydia is rarely resistant).
If an effective antibiotic therapy has been given, consider trichomoniasis (tinidazole or metronidazole PO, 2 g
single dose); also consider reinfection.
Footnotes
(a)In areas where lymphatic ﬁlariasis is endemic, be careful not to confuse purulent urethral discharge with milky or rice-water
urine (chyluria) suggestive of lymphatic ﬁlariasis.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Abnormal vaginal discharge
Last updated: August 2022
 
Abnormal vaginal discharge is deﬁned as discharge that is different from usual with respect to
colour/odour/consistency (e.g. discoloured or purulent or malodorous).
 
Abnormal discharge is often associated with vulvar pruritus or pain with intercourse (dyspareunia), or painful or difﬁcult
urination (dysuria) or lower abdominal pain. Routinely check for abnormal vaginal discharge in women presenting with
these symptoms.
 
Abnormal vaginal discharge may be a sign of infection of the vagina (vaginitis) and/or the cervix (cervicitis) or upper
genital tract infection.
Abnormal discharge must be clinically conﬁrmed: inspection of the vulva, speculum exam checking for cervical/vaginal
inﬂammation or discharge.
Abdominal and bimanual pelvic examinations should be performed routinely in all women presenting with vaginal
discharge to rule out upper genital tract infection (lower abdominal pain and cervical motion tenderness).
 
The principal causative organisms are:
Case managementIn vaginitis: Gardnerella vaginalis and other bacteria (bacterial vaginosis), Trichomonas vaginalis (trichomoniasis)
and Candida albicans (candidiasis).
In cervicitis: Neisseria gonorrhoeae (gonorrhoea) and Chlamydia trachomatis (chlamydia).
In upper genital tract infections: see Upper genital tract infections.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Cervicitis may be difﬁcult to diagnose. When in doubt, administer treatment for cervicitis to women with abnormal
vaginal discharge and any of the following risk factors:
Laboratory
Treatment of the patient
Cervicitis
Treat for both chlamydia AND gonorrhoea.
 Urethral discharge in the partner
Context of sexual violence or prostitution
New partner or more than one partner in the preceding 3 months
Xpert molecular (PCR) tests are recommended for the detection of C. trachomatis and N. gonorrhoea. 
Microscopic examination of a fresh wet smear may show mobile T. vaginalis, yeast cells and hyphae in candidiasis,
and “clue cells” in bacterial vaginosis. 
Identiﬁcation of N. gonorrhoeae by Gram-stained smear is not sensitive in women and is not recommended. This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Bacterial vaginosis and trichomoniasis
tinidazole PO: 2 g single dose
or metronidazole PO: 2 g single dose
 
In the case of treatment failure:
tinidazole PO: 500 mg 2 times daily for 5 days
or metronidazole PO: 400 to 500 mg 2 times daily for 7 days
Vulvovaginal candidiasis
clotrimazole (500 mg vaginal tab): 1 tablet inserted deep into the vagina at bedtime, single dose
 
If the patient has extensive vulvar involvement, miconazole 2% cream (one application to the vulva 2 times daily for 7
days) may be used in combination with the intravaginal treatment above. Miconazole cream may complement, but
does not replace, treatment with clotrimazole.
Treatment of the partner
When the patient is treated for vaginitis or cervicitis, the partner receives the same treatment as the patient, whether
or not symptoms are present.
 
In the case of vulvovaginal candidiasis, the partner is treated only if symptomatic (itching and redness of the
glans/prepuce): miconazole 2% cream, one application 2 times daily for 7 days.Treatment for chlamydia   Treatment for gonorrhoea
Non-pregnant women
azithromycin PO: 1 g single dose
or
doxycycline PO: 100 mg 2 times daily
for 7 daysPLUS ceftriaxone IM: 500 mg single dose 
or, if not available,
ceﬁxime PO: 400 mg single dose
Pregnant women
azithromycin PO: 1 g single dose
or
erythromycin PO: 1 g 2 times daily
or 500 mg 4 times daily for 7 daysPLUS ceftriaxone IM: 500 mg single dose
or, if not available,
ceﬁxime PO: 400 mg single dose
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Genital ulcers
Genital ulcers, deﬁned as single or multiple vesicular, ulcerative or erosive lesions of the genital tract, with or without
inguinal lymphadenopathy, should lead to consideration of sexually transmitted infection.
The principal causative organisms are Treponema pallidum (syphilis), Haemophilus ducreyi (chancroid) and Herpes
simplex (genital herpes). Chlamydia trachomatis (lymphogranuloma venereum) and Calymmatobacterium
granulomatis (donovanosis)are less frequent.
Case management
Laboratory
Laboratory testing available in the ﬁeld is of little value: e.g., in syphilis, a negative RPR or VDRL result does not
exclude primary syphilis in early stage, and a positive test may reﬂect previous infection in a successfully treated
patient.
Treatment of the patient
Genital herpes a  
Local treatment: clean the area with soap and water.
Antiviral treatment: aciclovir POThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
In patients with a ﬁrst episode, treatment may reduce the duration of symptoms when given within 5 days after the
onset of symptoms: 400 mg 3 times daily for 7 days.
In patients with recurrence, give the same dose for 5 days, but treatment is only effective if initiated during the
prodromal phase or within 24 hours after the onset of symptoms.
In patients with frequent recurrences (more than 6 episodes par year), see HIV infection and AIDS, Chapter 8.
Syphilis
benzathine benzylpenicillin IM: 2.4 MUI per injection (half the dose in each buttock).
Early syphilis (primary, secondary, or early latent infection of less than 12 months duration): single dose
Late latent syphilis (infection of more than 12 months duration or of unknown duration): one injection weekly for 3
weeks
or, for penicillin-allergic patients or if penicillin is not available:
erythromycin PO: 1 g 2 times daily or 500 mg 4 times daily for 14 days (early syphilis) or 30 days (late latent syphilis)
or
doxycycline PO: 100 mg 2 times daily for 14 days (early syphilis) or 30 days (late latent syphilis)
or 
azithromycin PO: 2 g single dose (only in cases of early syphilis and only if the strain is sensitive)
Chancroid
azithromycin PO: 1 g single dose
or
ceftriaxone IM: 250 mg single dose
or
erythromycin PO: 1 g 2 times daily or 500 mg 4 times daily for 7 days
 
Fluctuant lymph nodes may be aspirated through healthy skin as required. Do not incise and drain lymph nodes.
 
Note: treat simultaneously for syphilis AND chancroid as both are frequent, and cannot be correctly distinguished on
clinical grounds.
Lymphogranuloma venereum
erythromycin PO: 1 g 2 times daily or 500 mg 4 times daily for 14 days
or
doxycycline PO: 100 mg 2 times daily for 14 days
 
Fluctuant lymph nodes may be aspirated through healthy skin as required. Do not incise and drain lymph nodes.
Donovanosis
Treatment is given until the complete disappearance of the lesions (usually, several weeks; otherwise risk of
recurrence):
azithromycin PO: 1 g on D1 then 500 mg once daily
or
erythromycin PO: 1 g 2 times daily or 500 mg 4 times daily
or
doxycycline PO: 100 mg 2 times daily
 
In HIV infected patients, add gentamicin IM: 6 mg/kg once daily.
Treatment of the partnerTreatment of pain: paracetamol PO (Chapter 1).
 [1] 
 b 
 [2]
 b
 bThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
The sexual partner receives the same treatment as the patient, whether or not symptoms are present, except in the
case of genital herpes (the partner is treated only if symptomatic).
 
ReferencesFootnotes
(a)Lymphogranuloma venereum is endemic in East and West Africa, India, Southeast Asia, South America and the Caribbean.
Donovanosis is endemic in South Africa, Papua New Guinea, India, Brazil and the Caribbean.
(b)Doxycycline is contra-indicated in pregnant and breast-feeding women.
1.Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Syphilis Pocket Guide for Providers. 2017.
https://www.cdc.gov/std/syphilis/Syphilis-Pocket-Guide-FINAL-508.pdf
2.World Health Organization. WHO guidelines for the treatment of Treponema pallidum (syphilis), Geneva, 2016.
http://apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/handle/10665/249572/9789241549806-eng.pdf?sequence=1 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Lower abdominal pain in women
Upper genital tract infection should be suspected in women with lower abdominal pain (see Upper genital tract
infections).
Gynaecological examination should be routinely performed:
 
If available, POCUS: perform FAST views to evaluate for free ﬂuid and urological abnormalities. Perform pelvic views
to evaluate for uterine and adnexal pathologies. Consult a gynaecologist (local or via telemedicine services). 
Case management
 Inspection of the vulva, speculum examination: check for purulent discharge or inﬂammation.
Abdominal exam and bimanual pelvic exam: check for pain on mobilising the cervix. 
 a 
Footnotes
(a)POCUS should only be performed and interpreted by trained clinicians.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Upper genital tract infections (UGTI)
Upper genital tract infections are bacterial infections of the uterus (endometritis) and/or the fallopian tubes (salpingitis),
which may be complicated by peritonitis, pelvic abscess or septicaemia.
UGTI may be sexually transmitted or arise after childbirth or abortion. Antibiotic choices are directed by the most
common pathogens in each scenario.
If peritonitis or pelvic abscess is suspected, request a surgical opinion while initiating antibiotic therapy.
Clinical features
Sexually transmitted infections
Diagnosis may be difﬁcult, as clinical presentation is variable.
Infections after childbirth or abortion
Treatment
Sexually transmitted infectionsSuggestive symptoms are: abdominal pain, abnormal vaginal discharge, fever, dyspareunia, menometrorrhagia,
dysuria.
Infection is probable when one or more of the above symptoms are associated with one or more of the following
signs: cervical motion tenderness, adnexal tenderness, tender abdominal mass.
Most cases present with a typical clinical picture, developing within 2 to 10 days after delivery (caesarean section
or vaginal delivery) or abortion (spontaneous or induced):
Fever, generally high
Abdominal or pelvic pain
Malodorous or purulent lochia
Enlarged, soft and/or tender uterus
Check for retained placenta.
In the early stages, fever may be absent or moderate and abdominal pain may be mild.
Criteria for hospitalisation include:
Clinical suspicion of severe or complicated infection (e.g. peritonitis, abscess, septicaemia)
Diagnostic uncertainty (e.g. suspicion of extra-uterine pregnancy, appendicitis)
Signiﬁcant obstacles to ambulatory oral treatment
No improvement after 48 hours, or deterioration within 48 hours, of outpatient treatment
All other patients may be treated on an ambulatory basis. They should be reassessed routinely on the third day of
treatment to evaluate clinical improvement (decrease in pain, absence of fever). If it is difﬁcult to organise routine
follow-up, advise patients to return to clinic if there is no improvement after 48 hours of treatment, or sooner if their
condition is worsening.
Antibiotic therapy combines 3 antibiotics to cover the most frequent causative organisms: gonococci, chlamydiae,
and anaerobes.
Ambulatory treatment:
ceﬁxime PO: 400 mg single dose or ceftriaxone IM: 250 mg single dose
+ doxycycline PO: 100 mg 2 times daily for 14 days
+ metronidazole PO: 500 mg 2 times daily for 14 days a This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Infections after childbirth or abortion
 Treatment in hospital:
ceftriaxone IM: 250 mg once daily
+ doxycycline PO: 100 mg 2 times daily for 14 days
+ metronidazole PO or IV infusion: 500 mg 2 times daily for 14 days
Continue triple therapy for 24 to 48 hours after signs and symptoms have improved (resolution of fever,
decrease in pain), then continue doxycycline (or erythromycin) + metronidazole to complete 14 days of
treatment. a 
If an IUD is in place, it should be removed (offer another method of contraception).
Analgesic treatment according to pain intensity.
Treatment of the partner: single dose treatment for both gonorrhoea AND chlamydia (as for Urethral discharge),
whether or not symptoms are present.
Antibiotic therapy: treatment must cover the most frequent causative organisms: anaerobes, Gram negatives and
streptococci.
Ambulatory treatment (early stages only):
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO for 7 days
Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1 exclusively. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin:
Ratio 8:1: 3000 mg daily (2 tablets of 500/62.5 mg 3 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 2625 mg daily (1 tablet of 875/125 mg 3 times daily)
or
amoxicillin PO: 1 g 3 times daily + metronidazole PO: 500 mg 3 times daily doses for 7 days
Treatment in hospital:
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) IV (dose expressed in amoxicillin): 1 g every 8 hours
+ gentamicin IM: 5 mg/kg once daily
or
ampicillin IV: 2 g every 8 hours
+ metronidazole IV infusion: 500 mg every 8 hours
+ gentamicin IM: as above
Stop antibiotic therapy 48 hours after resolution of fever and clinical signs and symptoms.
In penicillin-allergic patients, use clindamycin IV (900 mg every 8 hours) + gentamicin (as above).
In case of placental retention: perform digital curettage or manual vacuum extraction (refer to the guide Essential
obstetric and newborn care, MSF) 24 hours after initiation of antibiotic therapy.
Analgesic treatment according to pain intensity.
If the patient’s condition deteriorates or if fever persists after 48-72 hours of treatment, consider the possibility of
complication requiring additional treatment (e.g. pelvic abscess drainage), otherwise change the antibiotic to
ceftriaxone + doxycycline + metronidazole as in hospital-based treatment of sexually transmitted UGTI.
Footnotes
(a)In pregnant/breastfeeding women: erythromycin PO: 1 g 2 times daily or 500 mg 4 times daily for 14 days
Single dose azithromycin is not effective against chlamydia in the treatment of sexually transmitted UGTI.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Venereal warts
Venereal warts are benign tumours of the skin or mucous membranes due to certain papilloma viruses (HPV).
Clinical features
Treatment
Choice of treatment depends on the size and location of the warts. Treatment may be less effective, and relapses
more frequent, in HIV infected patients.
External warts < 3 cm and vaginal warts
podophyllotoxin 0.5%solution may be self-applied by the patient, but in the event of vaginal warts, the treatment
must be applied by medical staff.
 
Explain the procedure to the patient: apply the solution to the warts using an applicator or cotton bud, sparing the
surrounding healthy skin, allow to air dry. On vaginal warts, the solution should be allowed to dry before the speculum is
withdrawn.
Apply the solution 2 times daily, 3 consecutive days per week, for up to 4 weeks.
 
Podophyllum preparations are contra-indicated in pregnantor breastfeeding women. They should not be applied on
cervical, intra-urethral, rectal, oral or extensive warts. Improper use may result in painful ulceration.
External warts > 3 cm; cervical, intra-urethral, rectal and oral warts; warts in pregnant or
breastfeeding women
Surgical excision or cryotherapy or electrocoagulation.
 Venereal warts are soft, raised, painless growths, sometimes clustered (cauliﬂower- like appearance) or macules
(ﬂat warts), which are more difﬁcult to discern. Warts can be external (vulva, penis, scrotum, perineum, anus) and/or
internal (vagina, cervix, urethra, rectum; oral cavity in HIV infected patients).
In women, the presence of external warts is an indication for a speculum examination to exclude vaginal or cervical
warts. Speculum exam may reveal a friable, fungating tumour on the cervix, suggestive of cancer associated with
papilloma virus. a 
 b  
 c  
Footnotes
(a)Certain types of HPV may cause cancer. Presence of genital warts in women is an indication to screen for precancerous
lesions of the cervix, if feasible in the context (visual inspection with acetic acid, or cervical smear, or other available
techniques), and to treat any lesions identiﬁed (cryotherapy, conisation, etc., according to diagnosis).
(b)Podophyllum 10%, 15% or 25% resin is another preparation which is much more caustic, and should be applied only by
medical staff. Protect the surrounding skin (vaseline or zinc oxide ointment) before applying the resin. Wash off with soap
and water after 1 to 4 hours. Apply once weekly for 4 weeks.
(c)Treatment of warts is not an emergency and may be deferred if alternatives to podophyllum preparations are not available.
Genital warts are not an indication for caesarean section: it is uncommon for warts to interfere with delivery, and the risk of
mother-to-child transmission is very low.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Major genital infections (summary)
 
Last updated: July 2021
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Pathogens/
InfectionsClinical features Investigations Treatment
Neisseria
gonorrhoeae
(gonorrhoea)In women:
vaginal discharge, cervicitis
(mucopurulent cervical discharge),
dysuria (50% of infections are
asymptomatic);
UGTI (salpingitis, endometritis).
In men: purulent urethral discharge
and sometimes dysuria (5 to 50% of
infections are asymptomatic).Best method is PCR
(Xpert), if available.
In men (not sensitive
enough in women): Gram
or methylene blue stain:
intracellular diplococci
and polymorphonuclear
leukocytes (more than 4
per ﬁeld).ceftriaxone IM: 500 mg
single dose
or, if not available,
ceﬁxime PO: 400 mg
single dose
Treat also for
chlamydia.
In case of upper genital
tract infection, see 
UGTI.
Chlamydia
trachomatis
(chlamydia)In women:
vaginal discharge, cervicitis, and
rarely dysuria (> 50% of
infections are asymptomatic);
UGTI (salpingitis, endometritis).
In men: mild urethral discharge and/or
dysuria but up to 90% of infections
are asymptomatic.The best method is PCR
(Xpert), if available.azithromycin PO: 1 g
single dose
or doxycycline PO:
200 mg daily for 7 days
Treat also for
gonococcal infection
(except when a Gram
stain in males or PCR
shows no N.
gonorrhoeae).
In case of upper genital
tract infection, see 
UGTI. (a) 
Trichomonas
vaginalis
(trichomoniasis)In women: yellow-green vaginal
discharge, sometimes foul smelling,
vulvar irritation (10 to 50% of
infections are asymptomatic).
In men: most infections are
asymptomatic. Can produce
balanitis, urethritis with mild discharge
and sometimes dysuria.Wet mount of fresh
vaginal ﬂuid shows motile
trichomonas (low
sensitivity).
pH of urethral/vaginal
ﬂuid > 4.5.tinidazole or
metronidazole PO: 2 g
single dose
Bacterial
vaginosis
(Gardnerella
vaginalis and
other
associated
bacteria)Diagnosis is made in the presence of 3 of the following 4 signs:
Homogenous grey-white adherent vaginal discharge
pH of vaginal ﬂuid > 4.5
Vaginal ﬂuid has an amine (ﬁshy) odour, especially when mixed with
10% KOH
Presence of clue cells in wet mount or Gram stain of vaginal ﬂuidtinidazole or
metronidazole PO: 2 g
single dose
Candida
albicans
(candidiasis)Mainly seen in women: pruritus and
vulvovaginitis, frequently creamy-
white vaginal discharge, sometimes
dysuria.Saline of KOH wet mount
of fresh vaginal ﬂuid
shows budding yeast
cells and pseudohyphae.In women:
clotrimazole 500
mg: one vaginal
tablet single doseThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
In men: balanitis/balanoposthitis
(inﬂammation of the glans/prepuce,
erythema, pruritus, white pustules)
and rarely urethritispH of vaginal ﬂuid:
normalIn men:
miconazole 2%
cream: 1 application
2 times daily for 7
days
Herpes
simplex
virus type 2
(genital herpes)Many asymptomatic carriers. Multiple
vesicles on genitals leading to painful
ulcerations. In women, affects vulva,
vagina and cervix; in males, penis and
sometimes urethra. In primary episodes,
fever (30%) and lymphadenopathy
(50%). Recurrences in 1/3 of infections
with shorter and milder symptoms.Diagnosis by culture,
serology and PCR done
exclusively at a reference
laboratory.Analgesics, local
disinfection.
If available, aciclovir
PO:
Primary episode:
1200 mg daily for 7
days, given within 5
days after onset of
lesions.
Recurrent
infections: same
dose for 5 days,
given within 24
hours after onset of
lesions.
Treponema
pallidum
(syphilis)Single ﬁrm painless genital ulcer, often
unnoticed.RPR/VDRL lack sensitivity
and speciﬁcity, but may be
useful for following
treatment effectiveness
(decrease in titer) or
conﬁrming re-infection (rise
in titer).
Treponemal tests (TPHA,
FTA-ABS, rapid tests such
as SD Bioline®) are more
sensitive and speciﬁc.benzathine
benzylpenicillin IM:
2.4 MIU per injection,
single dose (syphylis <
12 months) or once
weekly for 3 weeks
(syphilis > 12 months or
unknown duration)
or azithromycin PO: 2
g single dose
or erythromycin PO: 2
g daily for 14 days
or doxycycline PO:
200 mg daily for 14
days
Treat also for
chancroid. (a) 
Haemophilus
ducreyi
(chancroid)Painful single (or multiple) genital ulcer
(soft chancre, bleeds easily when
touched).
Painful and voluminous inguinal
lymphadenitis in 50%. Fistulae develop in
25% of cases.H. ducreyi bacillus is difﬁcult
to identify on microscopy or
by culture.azithromycin PO: 1 g
single dose
or ceftriaxone IM: 250
mg single dose
or ciproﬂoxacin PO:
1 g daily for 3 days
or erythromycin PO: 2
g daily for 7 days
Treat also for syphillis. (b) This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Human
papillomavirus
(venereal
warts)Soft, raised, painless growths,
sometimes clustered (acuminate
condyloma) or macules (ﬂat warts).
Warts can be external (vulva, penis,
scrotum, perineum, anus) and/or internal
(vagina, cervix, urethra, rectum; oral
cavity in HIV infected patients).The diagnosis is based on
clinical features.
It feasible in the context, the
presence of genital warts in
women in an indication to
screen for pre-cancerous
lesions of the cervix (visual
inspection with acetic acid,
or cervical smear, or other
available techniques).External warts < 3
cm and vaginal
warts:
podophyllotoxin
0.5%
External warts > 3
cm; cervical, intra-
urethral, rectal and
oral warts; warts in
pregnant or
breastfeeding
women: surgical
excision or
cryotherapy or
electrocoagulation.
(a)Doxycycline is contra-indicated in pregnant women. It should not be administered to breast-feeding women if the treatment
exceeds 7 days (use erythromycin).
(b)Ciproﬂoxacin should be avoided in pregnant women.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Abnormal uterine bleeding (in the absence of
pregnancy)
Last updated: October 2021
 
 
For the management of pregnancy-related bleeding, refer to the guide Essential obstetric and newborn care, MSF.
In all events
According to clinical examinationHeavy menstrual bleeding or intermenstrual genital bleeding
In women of childbearing age:
assess if the bleeding is pregnancy-related;
perform a pregnancy test.
Rapidly assess the severity of bleeding.
Perform a pelvic examination:
speculum examination: determine the origin (vagina, cervix, uterine cavity) and cause of the bleeding; appearance
of the cervix; amount and intensity of bleeding;
bimanual examination: look for cervical motion tenderness, uterine enlargement or irregularity.
Assess for recent trauma or surgical history.
Measure haemoglobin, if possible, to prevent or treat anaemia.
In the event of signs of shock, see Shock, Chapter 1.
In the event of heavy bleeding:
start an IV infusion of Ringer lactate;
monitor vital signs (heart rate, blood pressure);
administer: 
tranexamic acid IV: 10 mg/kg (max. 600 mg) every 8 hours. When bleeding has been reduced, switch to
tranexamic acid PO: 1 g 3 times daily, until bleeding stops (max. 5 days). [1] 
if bleeding persists and/or in case or contraindication to tranexamic acid, administer one of the following two
drugs (except if suspicion of cervical or endometrial cancer):
ethinylestradiol/levonorgestrel PO (0.03 mg/0.15 mg tab): one tablet 3 times daily for 7 days
or medroxyprogesterone acetate PO: 20 mg 3 times daily for 7 days
In case of massive haemorrhage and/or lack of response to medical management: surgical management (dilation
and curettage, intrauterine balloon, and as a last resort, hysterectomy).
In the event of referral to a surgical facility, difﬁcult transport conditions may aggravate the bleeding: the patient
should have an IV line and/or be accompanied by family members who are potential blood donors.
If available, POCUS: perform FAST to evaluate for free ﬂuid and/or urological abnormalities; perform pelvic views
to evaluate for uterine and/or adnexal pathologies. a 
Friable, hard, ulcerated, hypertrophic mass on the cervix: possible cervical cancer; surgical treatment,
chemotherapy, radiation therapy or palliative care is required depending on the stage of the cancer. While waiting
for appropriate treatment, tranexamic acid PO (1 g 3 times daily for 5 days max.) may be used to reduce bleeding.
Inﬂammation of the cervix, light or moderate bleeding, purulent cervical discharge, pelvic pain: consider cervicitis
(see Abnormal vaginal discharge) or salpingitis (see Upper genital tract infections).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Note: rule out other causes of vaginal bleeding before diagnosing functional uterine bleeding. Consider for example
poorly tolerated contraceptive, endometrial cancer in postmenopausal women, genitourinary schistosomiasis in
endemic areas (see Schistosomiasis, Chapter 6).
 
ReferencesEnlarged, irregular uterus: uterine ﬁbroids. In case of failure to respond to medical treatment, surgical management
is required. While waiting for surgery or if surgery is not indicated, treat as for functional uterine bleeding.
Normal uterus and cervix: possible functional uterine bleeding: tranexamic acid PO as above. In case of repeated
bleeding, it can be combined with an NSAID (ibuprofen PO for 3 to 5 days, see Pain, Chapter 1) and/or one of the
following long-term treatments:
levonorgestrel intrauterine device
or ethinylestradiol/levonorgestrel PO (0.03 mg/0.15 mg tab): one tablet daily
or medroxyprogesterone acetate IM: 150 mg every 3 months
or medroxyprogesterone acetate PO: 10 mg once daily (up to 30 mg once daily if necessary) for 21 days
monthly. b 
Footnotes
(a)POCUS should only be performed and interpreted by trained clinicians.
(b)Unlike the other treatments, this drug has no contraceptive effect.
1.American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. Management of acute abnormal uterine bleeding in nonpregnant
reproductive-aged women. Obstet Gynecol. 2013 Apr;121(4):891-6. 
https://www.acog.org/-/media/project/acog/acogorg/clinical/ﬁles/committee-opinion/articles/2013/04/management-of-
acute-abnormal-uterine-bleeding-in-nonpregnant-reproductive-aged-1.pdf
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 10: Medical and minor surgical
procedures
Dressings
Treatment of a simple wound
Burns
Cutaneous abscess
Pyomyositis
Leg ulcers
Necrotising infections of the skin and soft tissues
Venomous bites and stings
Dental infections
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Dressings
The objective of dressing wounds is to promote healing. The procedure includes cleaning, disinfection and protection
of the wound while respecting the rules of hygiene.
Not all wounds need to be covered by a dressing (e.g. a clean wound that has been sutured for several days; a small
dry wound not requiring sutures).
Equipment
Sterile instruments
 
Instruments for one dressing for one patient must be wrapped together in paper or fabric (or can be placed in a metallic
box) and sterilised together to limit handling and breaks in asepsis. 5 to 10 compresses may be included in this set.
If there are no sterile instruments, a dressing can be done using sterile gloves.
Renewable supplies
Organisation of care
Proper organization of care helps maintain the rules of asepsis and decreases the risk of contamination of the wound
or transmission of organisms from one patient to another:
TechniqueOne Kocher or Pean forceps
One dissecting forceps
One pair of surgical scissors or one scalpel to excise necrotic tissue and to cut gauze or sutures
Sterile compresses
Non-sterile disposable gloves
Adhesive tape and/or crepe or gauze bandage
Sterile 0.9% sodium chloride or sterile water
Depending on the wound: antiseptic (7.5% povidone iodine scrub solution, 10% povidone iodine dermal solution),
parafﬁn compresses, analgesics
Assign one room for dressings. It must be cleaned and the waste removed every day. The dressing table must be
disinfected after each patient.
Dressings may be applied at the bedside if the patient’s condition requires. Use a clean, disinfected dressing trolley
with: on the upper tray, sterile and/or clean material (dressing set, extra compresses, etc.) and on the lower tray,
septic material (container for contaminated instruments, sharps disposal container and a container or garbage bag
for waste).
Prepare all the necessary material in a well lit area. If necessary, arrange for an assistant to be present.
Wear protective glasses if there is a risk of projection from an oozing wound.
Always proceed from clean to dirty: start with patients with uninfected wounds. If there are multiple dressings for
one patient, start with the cleanest wound.
If the procedure may be painful, give an analgesic and wait the necessary time for the drug to take effect before
starting the procedure.
Settle the patient comfortably in an area where his privacy is respected throughout the procedure.
Explain the procedure to the patient and obtain his co-operation.
Instruments (or sterile gloves) must be changed between patients.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Removal of an old dressing
Observe the wound
 
 
In any case, if local signs of infection are observed, look for general signs of infection (fever, chills, changes in the
overall condition).
Technique for cleaning and dressing of the woundTo prevent drug interactions, use the same antiseptic for all care of one patient.
Wash hands (ordinary soap) or disinfect them with an alcohol-based hand rub.
Put on non-sterile gloves and remove the adhesive tape, bandage and superﬁcial compresses.
Proceed gently with the last compresses. If they stick to the wound, loosen them with 0.9% sodium chloride or
sterile water before removal.
Observe the soiled compresses. If there is signiﬁcant discharge, a greenish colour or a foul odour, a wound infection
is likely.
Discard the dressing and the non-sterile gloves in the waste container.
In the case of an open wound, loss of cutaneous tissue or ulcer, the colour is an indicator of the stage in the healing
process:
black area = necrosis, wet or dry infected eschar
yellow or greenish area = infected tissue and presence of pus
red area = granulation, usually a sign of healing (unless there is hypertrophy), however, red edges indicate
inﬂammation or infection
pink area = process of epithelisation, the ﬁnal stage of healing that begins at the edges of the wound
In the case of a sutured wound, the existence of local signs of suppuration and pain requires the removal of one or
more sutures to avoid the infection spreading. Local signs include:
red, indurated and painful edges
drainage of pus between the sutures, either spontaneously or when pressure is applied on either side of the
wound
lymphangitis
sub-cutaneous crepitations around the wound
Wash hands again or disinfect them with an alcohol-based hand rub.
Open the dressing set or box after checking the date of sterilisation and that the wrapping is intact.
Pick up one of the sterile forceps being careful not to touch anything else.
Pick up the second forceps with the help of the ﬁrst one.
Make a swab by folding a compress in 4 using the forceps.
Clean sutured wound or clean open wound with red granulation:
clean with 0.9% sodium chloride or sterile water to remove any organic residue; work from the cleanest to the
dirtiest area (use a clean swab for each stroke);
dab dry with a sterile compress;
re-cover a sutured wound with sterile compresses or an open wound with parafﬁn compresses; the dressing
should extend a few cm beyond the edges of the wound;
keep the dressing in place with adhesive tape or a bandage.
Necrotic or infected open wounds:
clean with povidone iodine (7.5% scrub solution, 1 part of solution + 4 parts of sterile 0.9% sodium chloride or
sterile water). Rinse thoroughly then dab dry with a sterile compress; or if not available, sterile 0.9% sodium
chloride or sterile water and apply an antiseptic (10% povidone iodine dermal solution).
apply sterile vaseline and remove all necrotic tissue at each dressing change until the wound is clean.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
The principles remain the same if the dressing is done using instruments or sterile gloves.
Subsequent dressingsDiscard any sharp materials used in an appropriate sharps container and the rest of the waste in a waste container.
As quickly as possible, soak the instruments in disinfectant.
Wash hands again or disinfect them with an alcohol-based hand rub.
Clean, sutured wound: remove the initial dressing after 5 days if the wound remains painless and odourless, and if
the dressing remains clean. The decision to re-cover or to leave the wound uncovered (if it is dry) often depends on
the context and local practices.
Infected, sutured wound: remove one or more sutures and evacuate the pus. Change the dressing at least once
daily.
Open, dirty wound: daily cleaning and dressing change.
Open granulating wound: change the dressing every 2 to 3 days, except if the granulation is hypertrophic (in this
case, apply local corticosteroids).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment of a simple wound
A simple wound is a break in the continuity of the skin limited in depth at the sub-cutaneous fatty tissue, that does not
affect the underlying structures (muscle, bone, joints, major arteries, nerves, tendons) and without signiﬁcant loss of
tissue.
 
The goal of treatment is to assure rapid healing of the wound without complications or sequelae. Several basic rules
apply:
Equipment
Instruments
(Figures 1a to 1d)
 
 
Instruments to suture one wound for one patient must be packaged and sterilised together (suture box or set) to limit
handling and breaks in asepsis.
Renewable supplies
Technique
Initial cleaningrapidly treat wounds, while maintaining the rules of asepsis and the order of the initial procedures: cleaning-
exploration-excision;
identify wounds that need to be sutured and those for which suturing would be harmful or dangerous;
immediately suture recent, clean, simple wounds (less than 6 hours old) and delay suturing contaminated wounds
and/or those more than 6 hours old;
prevent local (abscess) or general (gas gangrene; tetanus) infections.
One dissecting forceps, one needle-holder, one pair of surgical scissors and one Pean or Kocher forceps are
usually enough.
One or two other artery forceps, a pair of Farabeuf retractors and a scalpel may be useful for a contused or deep
wound.
For local anaesthesia: sterile syringe and needle; 1% lidocaine (without epinephrine)
Sterile gloves, fenestrated sterile towel
Sterile absorbable and non-absorbable sutures
Antiseptic and supplies for dressings
For drainage: corrugated rubber drain or equivalent, nylon suture
Settle the patient comfortably in an area with good lighting and ensure all the necessary material is prepared.
Explain the procedure to the patient and ensure his co-operation.
If the patient is a young child, arrange to have an assistant hold the child if necessary.
Wear suitable clothing: sterile gloves for all wounds and a gown and protective glasses if there is a risk of projection
from a bleeding wound.
Start by washing the wound, prolong the cleaning if the wound is particularly soiled. Use ordinary soap
or 7.5% povidone iodine scrub solution and water and rinse.
If necessary use a sterile brush. Cleaning with running water is preferable to cleaning by immersion.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Exploration
Wound excision
Immediate suturing of a simple wound
Delayed suturing of a simple wound
Healing by second intention of infected woundsIf the wound is infected and the patient has general signs of infection (fever, chills, changes in the overall condition)
systemic antibiotic therapy may be required. Administer antibiotics at least one hour prior to starting care.
Wash hands and put on sterile gloves.
Disinfect the wound and surrounding area with 10% povidone iodine.
Cover the wound with a fenestrated sterile towel.
Local anaesthetic: inﬁltrate 1% lidocaine into the edges of the wound and wait at least 2 minutes for the
anaesthetic to take effect.
Proceed carefully from the superﬁcial to the deepest parts of the wound to explore the extent of the wound, if
necessary, aided by an assistant.
Consider the anatomical location of the wound and look for injury to any underlying structures (the clinical
examination of a limb must include evaluation of sensitivity and motor functioning, as well as that of tendons in
order to orient surgical exploration):
a wound that communicates with a fracture is an open fracture,
a wound close to a joint may be a joint wound,
a wound on the hands or feet may affect the nerves and/or tendons,
a wound close to a major artery may be an arterial wound even if it is no longer bleeding.
Look for and remove any foreign bodies.
In the event of signiﬁcant pain or bleeding, the exploration must be completed in an operating room.
The goal of the excision is to remove non-viable tissue, which favours the proliferation of bacteria and infection.
The wound may require little or no excision if it is clean. The excision is more extensive if the wound is bruised,
irregular or extensive.
Limit excision of the skin around the wound, particularly in facial wounds.
Sub-cutaneous fat and tissue of doubtful viability should be generously excised in order to leave only well
vascularised tissue.
Immediate suturing may have serious consequences for the patient if precautions to prevent infection and promote
healing are not taken.
The decision to suture immediately can only be taken after the cleaning, exploration and satisfactory excision, and
if the following conditions are met: simple wound, no more than 6 hours old with no devitalised or contused tissue
(the wound may be as long as 24 hours old if on the face, scalp, upper limbs or hands).
Bites (for local treatment see Rabies, Chapter 8) and bullet, shell or mine shrapnel wounds should not be
immediately sutured.
Wounds that do not ﬁll the above conditions should not be immediately sutured.
After cleaning, exploration and excision a simple dressing is applied to the open wound.
Further cleaning and removal of any remaining necrotic tissue is completed with daily dressing changes.
If after 72 hours there are no signs of local infection, the wound may be sutured.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
If the wound does not meet the conditions of cleanliness described above, the wound cannot be sutured. It will heal
either spontaneously (healing by secondary intention), or will require a skin graft (once the wound is clean) if there is
signiﬁcant loss of tissue.
 
Figures 1 : Basic instruments
Figures 2 : How to hold instruments
Figure 1a
Kocher forceps, 
straight, toothed
Figure 1b
Kelly forceps, 
curved, non-toothed
Figure 1c
Small artery forceps,
curved, non-toothed
 
Figure 1d 
Farabeuf retractors
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Figures 3 : Wound debridement
This should be done sparingly, limited to excision of severely contused or lacerated tissue that is clearly becoming
necrotic.
Figure 2a
Always mount a surgical blade using a needle holder. 
Change the blade for each new procedure.
Figure 2b 
Dissecting forceps should not be held in the palm of the hand,
but rather between the thumb and index ﬁnger. 
Toothed dissecting forceps should only be used on skin.
Figure 2c
Insert the thumb and the ring ﬁnger into the handle of a needle holder (or scissors), and stabilize the instrument using
the index ﬁnger.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Figures 4 : Practising making knots using forceps
Figure 3a
Debridement of a contused, ragged wound: straightening of the wound edges with a scalpel. Be conservative in
facial wounds.
Figure 3b 
Excision of edges of the aponeurosis to prevent necrosis.
Figure 3c
Excision of contused muscle.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Figure 4a
Loop the suture around the needle holder in one direction and remember the direction of the loop. Grasp the loose
end with the needle holder
and pull it through the loop to make the ﬁrst knot.
Lower the knot so that it closes the wound.
Figure 4b
The second loop should be in the opposite direction. At least 3 knots are needed to make a suture, alternating form
one direction to the other.
Figure 4c
In principle the ﬁrst knot lies ﬂat. 
 
Figure 4d
Second knot in the opposite direction.
Figure 4e
Figure 4fThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Figures 5 : Particular problemsGrasp the loose end with the needle holder.
Figure 4g
Fist ﬂat knot.
Slide the knot towards the wound using the hand holding 
the loose end while holding the other end with the needle holder.
Tighten the knot without causing tissue ischaemia.
Figure 4h
 Figure 4i
Second knot in the opposite direction.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Figure 6 : Closing a corner
Figure 7 : Closure of the skin, simple interrupted sutures with non-absorbable sutures
Figure 5a
 Figure 5b
The suture should be as deep as it is wide.
Figure 5c
 Figure 5d
The suture is too shallow, the edges are invaginated.
Figure 5e 
Poor lining of the edges. 
 
Figure 5f 
Do not make the knot directly over the wound.
 
 This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Burns
Last updated: August 2022
 
Burns are cutaneous lesions caused by exposure to heat, electricity, chemicals or radiation. They cause signiﬁcant pain
and may threaten survival and/or compromise function.
Classiﬁcation of burns
Severe burns: one or more of the following parameters:
 
Minor burns: involving less than 10% of the BSA in children and 15% in adults, in the absence of other risk factors
Evaluation of burns
Extent of burns
Lund-Browder table – Percentage of body surface area according to age
 Involving more than 10% of the body surface area (BSA) in children and 15% in adults
Inhalation injury (smoke, hot air, particles, toxic gas, etc.)
Major concomitant trauma (fracture, head injury, etc.)
Location: face, hands, neck, genitalia/perineum, joints (risk of functional deﬁcit)
Electrical and chemical burns or burns due to explosions
Age < 3 years or > 60 years or signiﬁcant co-morbidities (e.g. epilepsy, malnutrition)
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
This table helps to accurately calculate the % of BSA involved according to patient’s age: e.g. burn of the face,
anterior trunk, inner surface of the lower arm and circumferential burn of left upper arm in a child 2 years of age: 8.5 +
13 + 1.5 + 4 = 27% BSA.
Depth of burnsLocation < 1 year 1-4 years 5-9 years 10-15 years Adults
Head 19 17 13 10 7
Neck 2 2 2 2 2
Anterior trunk 13 13 13 13 13
Posterior trunk 13 13 13 13 13
Right buttock 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Left buttock 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Perineum/genitalia 1 1 1 1 1
Right upper arm 4 4 4 4 4
Left upper arm 4 4 4 4 4
Right lower arm 3 3 3 3 3
Left lower arm 3 3 3 3 3
Right hand 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Left hand 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5 2.5
Right thigh 5.5 6.5 8.5 8.5 9.5
Left thigh 5.5 6.5 8.5 8.5 9.5
Right leg 5 5 5.5 6 7
Left leg 5 5 5.5 6 7
Right foot 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5
Left foot 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5 3.5
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Apart from ﬁrst-degree burns (painful erythema of the skin and absence of blisters) and very deep burns (third-degree
burns, carbonization), it is not possible, upon initial examination, to determine the depth of burns. Differentiation is
possible after D8-D10.
 
 
Evaluation for the presence of inhalation injury
Dyspnoea with chest wall indrawing, bronchospasm, soot in the nares or mouth, productive cough, carbonaceous
sputum, hoarseness, etc.
Treatment of severe burns
I. Initial management
On admission
Once the patient is stabilized  Superﬁcial burn on D8-D10 Deep burn on D8-D10
Sensation Normal or pain Insensitive or diminished sensation
Colour Pink, blanches with pressure White, red, brown or black
Does not blanch with pressure
Texture Smooth and supple Firm and leathery
Appearance Minimal ﬁbrinous exudate
Granulation tissue evident
Bleeds when incisedCovered with ﬁbrinous exudate
Little or no bleeding when incised
Healing Heals spontaneously within 5-
15 daysVery deep burn: always requires surgery (no
spontaneous healing)
Intermediate burn: may heal spontaneously in 3 to 5
weeks; high risk of infection and permanent sequelae
Ensure airway is patent; high-ﬂow oxygen, even when SpO is normal. 2
Establish IV access, through unburned skin if possible (intraosseous access if IV access is not possible).
Ringer lactate (RL): 20 ml/kg during the ﬁrst hour, even if the patient is stable.
Morphine SC: 0.2 mg/kg (Step 1 and Step 2 analgesics are not effective).
In the event of chemical burns: ﬂush with copious amounts of water for 15 to 30 minutes, avoiding contamination of
healthy skin; do not attempt to neutralize the chemical agent.
Remove clothes if they are not adherent to the burn.
Take history of the burn injury: mechanism, causative agent, time, etc.
Assess the burn injury: extent, depth, carbonization; ocular burns, burns at risk of secondary functional deﬁcits;
circumferential burns of the extremities, chest or neck. Wear face mask and sterile gloves during the examination.
Assess for associated injuries (fractures, etc.).
Protect the patient and keep him warm: clean/sterile sheet, survival blanket.
Insert a urinary catheter if burns involve > 15% of BSA, and in the case of electrical burns or burns of the
perineum/genitalia.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Notes:
II. General measures during the ﬁrst 48 hours
Resuscitative measures
Intravenous replacement ﬂuid to correct hypovolaemia:
 
Fluid and electrolyte requirements during the ﬁrst 48 hours according to age
 
Note: increase replacement volumes by 50% (3 ml/kg x % BSA for the ﬁrst 8 hours) in the event of inhalation injury or
electrical burn. For burns > 50% BSA, limit the calculation to 50% BSA.
This formula provides a guide only and should be adjusted according to systolic arterial pressure (SAP) and urine
output. Avoid ﬂuid overload. Reduce replacement ﬂuid volumes if urine output exceeds the upper limit.
Target endpoints for IV replacement ﬂuidsInsert a nasogastric tube if burns involve > 20% of BSA (in the operating room while carrying out dressing
procedure).
Calculate and initiate ﬂuid and electrolyte requirements for the ﬁrst 24 hours.
Intensive monitoring: level of consciousness, heart rate, blood pressure, SpO, respiratory rate (RR) hourly;
temperature and urine output every 4 hours.2
Additional testing: haemoglobin, blood group, urine dipstick test.
Prepare the patient for the ﬁrst dressing procedure in the operating room.
Burns do not bleed in the initial stage: check for haemorrhage if haemoglobin level is normal or low.
Burns alone do not alter the level of consciousness. In the case if altered consciousness, consider head injury,
intoxication, postictal state in epileptic patients.
Clinical manifestations of electrical burns vary signiﬁcantly according to the type of current. Look for complications
(arrhythmia, rhabdomyolysis, neurological disorders).
  Children < 12 years Children ≥ 12 years and adults
0 - 8 h 2 ml/kg x % BSA of RL
+ maintenance ﬂuidper hour x 8 h  (a) 2 ml/kg x % BSA of RL
8 - 24 h 2 ml/kg x % BSA of RL
+ maintenance ﬂuidper hour x 16 h  (a) 2 ml/kg x % BSA of RL
24 - 48 h Daily maintenance IV ﬂuid requirementsminus oral
ﬂuids such as milk, broth, gavage feeds (do not
include drinking water in the calculation). (a) 40 ml/kg RL minus oral ﬂuids (do not include
drinking water in the calculation).
(a)Maintenance ﬂuid: alternate RL and 5% glucose: 4 ml/kg/h for ﬁrst 10 kg of body weight + 2 ml/kg/h for next 10 kg + 1
ml/kg/h for each additional kg (over 20 kg, up to 30 kg)
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
In patients with oliguria despite adequate ﬂuid replacement:
dopamine IV: 5 to 15 micrograms/kg/minute by IV pump
or
epinephrine IV: 0.1 to 0.5 micrograms/kg/minute by IV pump
Stop the infusion after 48 hours, if ﬂuid requirements can be met by the oral route or gavage.
Respiratory care
Analgesia
See Pain management
Nutrition
Start feeding early, beginning at H8:
Patients at risk of rhabdomyolysis
In the event of deep and extensive burns, electrical burns, crush injuries to the extremities:
Infection control  Non-electrical burns Electrical burns
Children
< 1 yearChildren 
1-12 yearsChildren 
> 12 years/adultsAll ages
AP (mmHg) SAP ≥ 60 SAP 70 to 90 + (2 x age) SAP ≥ 100 Age appropriate SAP
Urine output 1 to 2 ml/kg/h 1 to 1.5 ml/kg/h 0.5 to 1 ml/kg/h 1 to 2 ml/kg/h
In all cases: continuous inhalation of humidiﬁed oxygen, chest physiotherapy.
Emergency surgical intervention if necessary: tracheotomy, chest escharotomy.
Do not administer corticosteroids (no effect on oedema; predisposition to infection). No speciﬁc treatment for
direct bronchopulmonary lesions.
Daily needs in adults
calories: 25 kcal/kg + 40 kcal/% BSA
proteins: 1.5 to 2 g/kg
High energy foods (NRG5, Plumpy'nut, F100 milk) are necessary if the BSA is > 20% (normal food is inadequate).
Nutritional requirements are administered according to the following distribution: carbohydrates 50%, lipids 30%,
proteins 20%.
Provide 5-10 times the recommended daily intake of vitamins and trace elements.
Enteral feeds are preferred: oral route or nasogastric tube (necessary if BSA > 20%).
Start with small quantities on D1, then increase progressively to reach recommended energy requirements within 3
days.
Assess nutritional status regularly (weigh 2 times weekly).
Reduce energy loss: occlusive dressings, warm environment (28-33 °C), early grafting; management of pain,
insomnia and depression.
Monitor for myoglobinuria: dark urine and urine dipstick tests.
If present:  induce alkaline diuresis for 48 hours (20 ml of 8.4% sodium bicarbonate per litre of RL) to obtain an
output of 1 to 2 ml/kg/hour. Do not administer dopamine or furosemide.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Precautions against infection are of paramount importance until healing is complete. Infection is one of the most
frequent and serious complications of burns:
Other treatments
III. Local treatment
Regular dressing changesprevent infection, decrease heat and ﬂuid losses, reduce energy loss, and promote patient
comfort. Dressings should be occlusive, assist in relieving pain, permit mobilisation, and prevent contractures.
Basic principles
TechniqueHygiene precautions (e.g. sterile gloves when handling patients).
Rigorous wound management (dressing changes, early excision).
Separate “new” patients (< 7 days from burn) from convalescent patients (≥ 7 days from burn).
Do not administer antibiotherapy in the absence of systemic infection.
Infection is deﬁned by the presence of at least 2 of 4 following signs: temperature > 38.5 °C or < 36 °C,
tachycardia, tachypnoea, elevation of white blood cell count by more than 100% (or substantial decrease in the
number of white blood cells).
In the event of systemic infection, start empiric antibiotherapy:
cefazolin IV
Children > 1 month: 25 mg/kg every 8 hours 
Adults : 2 g every 8 hours
+ ciproﬂoxacin PO
Children > 1 month: 15 mg/kg 2 times daily 
Adults: 500 mg 3 times daily 
Local infection, in the absence of signs of systemic infection, requires topical treatment with silver sulfadiazine. Not
to be applied to children under 2 months.
Omeprazole IV from D1
Children: 1 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 40 mg once daily
Tetanus vaccination (see Tetanus, Chapter 7).
Thromboprophylaxis: low molecular weight heparin SC beginning 48 to 72 hours post-injury.
Physiotherapy from D1 (prevention of contractures), analgesia is necessary.
Intentional burns (suicide attempt, aggression): appropriate psychological follow-up.
 a  
Rigorous adherence to the principles of asepsis.
Dressing changes require morphine administration in the non-anaesthetised patient.
The ﬁrst dressing procedure is performed in the operating room under general anaesthesia, the following in an
operating room under general anaesthesia or at the bedside with morphine.
At the time of the ﬁrst dressing procedure, shave any hairy areas (armpit, groin, pubis) if burns involve the adjacent
tissues; scalp (anteriorly in the case of facial burns, entirely in the case of cranial burns). Cut nails.
Clean the burn with povidone iodine scrub solution (1 volume of 7.5% povidone iodine + 4 volumes of 0.9% sodium
chloride or sterile water). Scrub gently with compresses, taking care to avoid bleeding.
Remove blisters with forceps and scissors.
Rinse with 0.9% sodium chloride or sterile water.
Dry the skin by blotting with sterile compresses.
Apply silver sulfadiazine directly by hand (wear sterile gloves) in a uniform layer of 3-5 mm to all burned areas
(except eyelids and lips) to children 2 months and over and adults.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Frequency
Monitoring
IV. Surgical care
Emergency surgical interventions
Burn surgery
V. Pain management
All burns require analgesic treatment. Pain intensity is not always predictable and regular assessment is paramount: use
a simple verbal scale (SVS) in children > 5 years and adults and NFCS or FLACC scales in children < 5 years (see Pain,
Chapter 1).
 
Morphine is the treatment of choice for moderate to severe pain. Development of tolerance is common in burn
patients and requires dose augmentation. Adjuvant treatment may complement analgesic medication (e.g. massage
therapy, psychotherapy).
Continuous pain (experienced at rest)Apply a greasy dressing (Jelonet® or petrolatum gauze) using a back and forth motion (do not use a circular
movement).
Cover with a sterile compresses, unfolded into a single layer. Never encircle a limb with a single compress.
Wrap with a crepe bandage, loosely applied.
Elevate extremities to prevent oedema; immobilise in extension.
Routinely: every 48 hours.
Daily in the event of superinfection or in certain areas (e.g. perineum).
Distal ischaemia of the burned limb is the main complication during the ﬁrst 48 hours. Assess for signs of ischaemia:
cyanosis or pallor of the extremity, dysaesthesia, hyperalgia, impaired capillary reﬁll.
Monitor daily: pain, bleeding, progression of healing and infection.
Escharotomy: in the case of circumferential burns of arms, legs or ﬁngers, in order to avoid ischaemia, and
circumferential burns of chest or neck that compromise respiratory movements.
Tracheotomy: in the event of airway obstruction due to oedema (e.g. deep cervicofacial burns). Tracheotomy can
be performed through a burned area.
Tarsorrhaphy: in the event of ocular or deep eyelid burns.
Surgery for associated injuries (fractures, visceral lesions, etc.).
Excision-grafting of deep burns, in the operating room, under general anaesthesia, between D5 and D6: excision of
necrotic tissue (eschar) with simultaneous grafting with autografts of thin skin. This intervention entails signiﬁcant
bleeding risk, do not involve more than 15% of BSA in the same surgery.
If early excision-grafting is not feasible, default to the process of sloughing-granulation-reepithelisation. Sloughing
occurs spontaneously due to the action of sulfadiazine/ petrolatum gauze dressings and, if necessary, by
mechanical surgical debridement of necrotic tissue. This is followed by granulation, which may require surgical
reduction in the case of hypertrophy. The risk of infection is high and the process is prolonged (> 1 month).
Moderate pain:
paracetamol PO + tramadol PO (see Pain, Chapter 1) 
Moderate to severe pain:
paracetamol PO + sustained release morphine PO (see Pain, Chapter 1) This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute pain experienced during care
Analgesics are given in addition to those given for continuous pain.
 
Note: these doses of morphine are for adults, dosing is the same in children > 1 year, should be halved in children
less than 1 year, and quartered in infants less than 3 months.
Chronic pain (during the rehabilitation period)
Minor burns
 In patients with severe burns, oral drugs are poorly absorbed in the digestive tract during the ﬁrst 48 hours, morphine
is administered by SC route.
Signiﬁcant medical interventions and extensive burns: general anaesthesia in an operating room.
Limited non-surgical interventions (dressings, painful physiotherapy):
Mild to moderate pain, 60 to 90 minutes before giving care: 
tramadol PO (see Pain, Chapter 1) rarely allows treatment to be completed comfortably. In the event of
treatment failure, use morphine.
Moderate or severe pain, 60 to 90 minutes before giving care:
immediate release morphine PO: initial dose of 0.5 to 1 mg/kg; the effective dose is usually around 1 mg/kg,
but there is no maximum dose.
or morphine SC: initial dose of 0.2 to 0.5 mg/kg; the effective dose is usually around 0.5 mg/kg, but there is no
maximum dose.
Pain management using morphine during dressing changes at the bedside requires:
A trained nursing team.
Availability of immediate release oral morphine and naloxone.
Close monitoring: level of consciousness, RR, heart rate, SpO, every 15 min for the ﬁrst hour following dressing
change, then routine monitoring.2
Assessment of pain intensity and sedation during the intervention and for 1 hour thereafter.
Necessary equipment for ventilation by mask and manual suction.
Gentle handling of the patient at all times.
Adjustment of morphine doses for subsequent dressings:
If pain intensity (SVS) is 0 or 1: continue with the same dose.
If SVS score ≥ 2: increase the dose by 25 to 50%. If pain control remains inadequate, the dressing change
should be carried out in the operating room under anaesthesia.
Take advantage of the residual analgesia following dressing changes to carry out physiotherapy.
As a last resort (morphine unavailable and no facilities to give general anaesthesia), in a safe setting (trained staff,
resuscitation equipment, recovery room), adding ketamine IM at analgesic doses (0.5 to 1 mg/kg) reinforces the
analgesic effect of the paracetamol + tramadol combination given before a dressing change.
The treatment is guided by self-evaluation of pain intensity, and utilises paracetamol and/or tramadol. Patients may
develop neuropathic pain (see Pain, Chapter 1).
All other associated pain (physiotherapy, mobilization) should be treated as acute pain.
Treat as outpatients.
Wound care: dressings with silver sulfadiazine (to children 2 months and over and adults) or petrolatum gauze
(except for ﬁrst degree superﬁcial burns).
Pain: paracetamol ± tramadol usually effective.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Footnotes
(a)Open technique « naked burn patient under a mosquito net » and water immersion therapy are obsolete and should no
longer be used.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Cutaneous abscess
A cutaneous abscess is a collection of pus within the dermis or subcutaneous tissue.
It is most commonly due to Staphylococcus aureus.
Clinical features
Paraclinical investigations
Radiography in case of suspected osteomyelitis or septic arthritis.
Treatment
Equipment
Anaesthesia
 
For analgesia, see Pain, Chapter 1.
Technique
Incision
(Figure 8a)Painful, red, shiny nodule with or without ﬂuctuance; suppuration or surrounding cellulitis (see Erysipelas and cellulitis,
Chapter 4).
Regional adenopathy and fever may be present.
Complications: osteomyelitis, septic arthritis, septic shock (see Shock, Chapter 1).
Treatment is surgical incision and drainage, under aseptic conditions (i.e. sterile consumables and instruments,
antiseptic skin preparation).
Refer to a surgeon any cutaneous abscess:
located in anterior and lateral neck, central triangle of the face, hand, perirectal region, breast, or
adjacent to major blood vessels (e.g. femoral artery), or
involving joint and bone.
Antibiotic therapy only if signs of systemic infection, extensive surrounding cellulitis or for individuals with risk
factors e.g. immunosuppression or diabetes (for antibiotic therapy, see Erysipelas and cellulitis, Chapter 4).
Sterile scalpel
Sterile curved, non-toothed artery forceps (Kelly type)
Sterile disposable gloves and compresses
Antiseptic solution and 0.9% sodium chloride
5 or 10 ml syringe
For small (approximately < 5 cm), well delineated abscess in adults: use local anaesthesia with 1% lidocaine
without epinephrine (10 mg/ml): 15 to 20 ml.
For larger (approximately > 5 cm), deep or poorly delineated abscess in adults or for abscess in children: consider
procedural sedation or general anaesthesia (ketamine IM: 10 mg/kg).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Digital exploration
(Figure 8b)
Washing
Abundant washing of the cavity using a syringe ﬁlled with 0.9% sodium chloride.
Drainage
(Figure 8c)
Only necessary for deep abscesses.
Insert a drain (or, failing that a gauze wick) into the base of the cavity. If possible, ﬁx it to the edge of the incision with a
single suture. The drain is withdrawn progressively and then, after 3 to 5 days removed completely.Hold the scalpel between the thumb and middle ﬁnger of the dominant hand, the index ﬁnger presses on the handle.
Hold the abscess between the thumb and index ﬁnger of the other hand. The scalpel blade should be perpendicular
to the skin.
The incision is made in a single stroke along the long axis of the abscess. The incision must be long enough for a
ﬁnger to be inserted.
 
Figure 8a
Incision with a scalpel
Explore the cavity with the index ﬁnger, breaking down all loculi (a single cavity should remain), evacuate the pus (and
foreign body, if present) and explore to the edges of the cavity.
The exploration also allows an assessment of the extent of the abscess, the depth, and location with respect to
underlying structures (arterial pulsation) or any possible contact with underlying bone. In this last case, seek surgical
advice.
 
  Figure 8b 
Exploration of the cavity, 
breaking down any loculi
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Dressing
Cover with sterile compresses.
 
Figure 8c
Drain ﬁxed to the skin
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Pyomyositis
Pyomyositis is an infection of the muscle, almost always due to Staphylococcus aureus. It most commonly affects the
muscles of the limbs and torso. Infections may occur simultaneously in multiple sites.
Risk factors include immunosuppression, concurrent S. aureus infection, malnutrition, trauma and injection drug use.
Risk of mortality is signiﬁcant if treatment is delayed.
Clinical features
Paraclinical investigations
Treatment
Equipment and anaesthesia
As for Cutaneous abscess, Chapter 10.
TechniqueSigns and symptoms:
local: exquisite muscle tenderness, oedema giving muscles "woody" texture on palpation.
systemic: regional adenopathy and fever.
pyomyositis of the psoas muscle: patient keeps hip ﬂexed and experiences pain on hip extension. If the abscess
is on the right side, the clinical signs are the same as for appendicitis with pain in the right iliac fossa.
Complications: septic emboli, endocarditis and septic arthritis, septic shock (see Shock, Chapter 1).
POCUS: assists in characterisation of abscess; can rule out deep venous thrombosis.  a 
Radiography: may demonstrate a foreign body, signs of osteomyelitis or osteosarcoma.
Immobilise the limb.
Systematic antibiotic therapy (see Erysipelas and cellulitis, Chapter 4). 
Adapt analgesics to the pain level (see Pain, Chapter 1).
Apply compresses soaked in 70% alcohol 2 times daily (max. 3 times daily to prevent burns to the skin) until incision
and drainage.
Treatment is surgical incision and drainage, under aseptic conditions (sterile consumables and instruments,
antiseptic skin preparation) following the rules for incision and drainage of abscesses (see Cutaneous abscess,
Chapter 10). Muscle abscesses are often deeper than other abscesses. As a result, aspiration with a large bore
needle may be necessary to locate the abscess. Needle aspiration is insufﬁcient treatment even if pus is evacuated
and should be followed by surgical incision and drainage.
In case of pyomyositis of the psoas muscle, start antibiotics and refer to a surgeon.
Generous incision along the axis of the limb, over the site of the abscess and avoiding underlying neurovascular
stuctures; incise the skin, subcutaneous tissues and muscular fascia with a scalpel (Figure 9a).
Dissect the muscle ﬁbres with non-toothed forceps (Kelly type) or round tipped scissors. Insert the instrument or a
ﬁnger into the muscle until the purulent cavity is reached. If an instrument is used, during insertion, keep the
instrument closed and perpendicular to the muscle ﬁbres. Withdraw gently with the scissors or forceps slightly open,
keeping instrument perpendicular to the ﬁbres (Figure 9b). If abscess is found to be very deep, it may be necessary
to refer to a surgeon.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Figures 9: Surgical incision-drainage of a pyomyositis
 Use a foreﬁnger to explore the cavity, break down any loculi and evacuate the pus (Figure 9c).
Wash abundantly with 0.9% sodium chloride.
Insert a large drain.
Fix the drain to the edge of the wound using a single suture. Remove the drain on about the 5 day (Figure 9d).th
 Figure 9a 
Long incision
 
Figure 9b
Dissection of the muscle using Kelly forceps, insert closed
then withdraw  
with the instrument slightly open
 Figure 9c 
Exploration and evacuation of pus with the ﬁnger
Figure 9d
Drain ﬁxed to the skin
Footnotes
(a)POCUS should only be performed and interpreted by trained clinicians.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Leg ulcers
Daily local treatment
Systemic treatmentLeg ulcers are chronic losses of cutaneous tissue. They are common in tropical regions, resulting from varied
aetiologies:
vascular: venous and/or arterial insufﬁciency,
bacterial: leprosy, Buruli ulcer (Mycobacterium ulcerans), phagedenic ulcer, yaws, syphilis,
parasitic: dracunculiasis (Guinea-worm disease), leishmaniasis,
metabolic: diabetes,
traumatic: trauma is often a precipitating factor combined with another underlying cause.
The history of the disease and a complete clinical examination (paying particular attention to the neurological
examination to determine if there is a peripheral neuropathy caused by leprosy or diabetes) usually leads to an
aetiological diagnosis.
All ulcers may become complicated with either local or regional secondary infections (abscess, lymphadenopathy,
adenitis, osteomyelitis, erysipela, pyodermitis), generalised infection (septicaemia), tetanus and after many years of
evolution, skin cancer.
Bathe the leg for 10 to 15 minutes in NaDCC and rinse in boiled water.
Remove any necrotic (black) and ﬁbrinous (yellowish) tissue using compresses or excise the tissue with a scalpel.
Apply:
to a clean ulcer, with little discharge: 10% povidone iodine and vaseline;
to a dirty ulcer, with little discharge: silver sulfadiazine to a limited area (monitor for systemic adverse effects);
to an oozing ulcer: 10% povidone iodine alone;
to an extensive, oozing ulcer or multiple ulcers: diluted povidone iodine (1/4 of 10% povidone iodine + 3/4 of
0.9% sodium chloride or clean water) for one minute then rinse with 0.9% sodium chloride or clean water to
reduce the risk of transcutaneous iodine absorption.
Cover with a dry sterile dressing.
Treatment with analgesics in the event of pain: adapt the level and dosage to the individual (see Pain, Chapter 1).
Give systemic antibiotics in case of:
Secondary infection (see Bacterial skin infections, Chapter 4).
Phagedenic ulcer (in the early stages, antibiotics may be useful. They are often ineffective in the chronic
stages):
doxycycline PO (except in children under 8 years and pregnant or lactating women)
Children 8 years and over: 4 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 200 mg once daily
or
metronidazole PO
Children: 10 mg/kg 3 times daily 
Adults: 500 mg 3 times daily
If after 7 days, antibiotherapy is effective, continue with doxycycline or metronidazole as above. Treatment
duration varies according to the clinical evolution.
Treat the cause.
Complementary therapy:
Elevate the legs in cases of venous and/or lymphatic insufﬁciency.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Tetanus prophylaxis if appropriate (see Tetanus, Chapter 7).
Skin graft if the ulcer is extensive, clean, red and ﬂat. Skin grafts are often necessary after surgical excision to
heal phagedenic and Buruli ulcers.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Necrotising infections of the skin and soft
tissues
Invasive infections of the soft tissues: skin, subcutaneous tissue, superﬁcial or deep fascia, muscles. They include
necrotising cellulitis, necrotising fasciitis, myonecrosis, gas gangrene, etc.
 
Clinical presentation depends on the causative organism and the stage of progression. Group A streptococcus is
frequently isolated, as are Staphylococcus aureus, enterobacteriaceae and anaerobic bacteria including Clostridium
sp.
 
Delay in treatment of a minor wound or certain types of wounds (gunshot wounds or stabbings, open fractures or non-
sterile intramuscular injections/circumcisions) or certain infections (varicella or omphalitis), favours the development of
a necrotising infection. Patient risk factors include immunosuppression, diabetes, malnutrition and advanced age.
 
A necrotising infection is a surgical emergency and has a high mortality rate.
Clinical features
Laboratory
Paraclinical investigations
Radiography: may demonstrate gas in muscles or along the fascia planes. Can rule out foreign body, osteomyelitis or
osteosarcoma.
Treatment
Prompt surgical management accompanied by IV antibiotic therapy is essential to reduce the high mortality. Refer
immediately to a surgeon. Start resuscitation if necessary (see Shock, Chapter 1).
 
 Initial signs and symptoms include erythema, oedema and pain disproportionate to appearance of infection.
Location depends on the portal of entry. It may be difﬁcult to differentiate necrotising infections from
nonnecrotising infections (see Erysipelas and cellulitis, Chapter 4). Systemic signs of infection (fever, tachycardia
etc.) may be present.
Lesions progress rapidly despite antibiotic therapy, with the development of the typical signs of a necrotizing
infection: haemorrhagic blisters and necrosis (cold bluish or blackish hypoaesthetic macules).
Signs of late infection: crepitus on palpation and fetid odour (gas gangrene) with signs of severe systemic infection
(see Shock, Chapter 1).
If available, the following tests can help identify an early necrotising infection: white blood cell count > 15 000/mm³
or < 4000/mm³; serum creatinine > 141 micromol/litre; serum glucose > 10 mmol/litre (180 mg/dl) or < 3.3 mmol/litre
(60 mg/dl). However, normal results do not exclude a necrotising infection.
Obtain specimens for bacterial culture in the operating room and blood cultures if possible. 
Emergency surgical treatment:
Debridement, drainage, wide excision of necrotic tissue and rapid amputation if necessary.
Surgical re-evaluation within 24 to 36 hours to check for eventual progression of the necrosis and need for
further debridement.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
cloxacillin IV infusion (60 minutes)
Children < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg every 6 hours
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 3 g every 6 hours
 
ceftriaxone slow IV (3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes)
Children 1 month and over: 100 mg/kg once daily
Adults: 2 g once daily
 
clindamycin IV infusion (30 minutes)
Neonates 0 to 7 days (< 2 kg): 5 mg/kg every 12 hours
Neonates 0 to 7 days (≥ 2 kg): 5 mg/kg every 8 hours
Neonates 8 days to < 1 month (< 2 kg): 5 mg/kg every 8 hours
Neonates 8 days to < 1 month (≥ 2 kg): 10 mg/kg every 8 hours
Children 1 month and over: 10 to 13 mg/kg every 8 hours (max. 2700 mg daily)
Adults: 900 mg every 8 hours
 
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) slow IV injection (3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes)
Children less than 3 months: 50 mg/kg every 12 hours 
Children ≥ 3 months and < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg every 8 hours (max. 6 g daily)
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 2 g every 8 hours
 
 IV antibiotic therapy for at least 14 days or more depending on clinical response:
cloxacillin + ceftriaxone + clindamycin or amoxicillin/clavulanic acid + clindamycin. For doses, see below.
 a 
 b 
 c 
 d 
Other treatments:
Deep vein thrombosis prophylaxis;
Appropriate management of pain (see Pain, Chapter 1);
Early nutritional support.
Footnotes
(a)Cloxacillin powder for injection should be reconstituted in 4 ml of water for injection. Then dilute each dose of cloxacillin in
5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or
5% glucose in children 20 kg and over and in adults.
(b)For administration by IV route, ceftriaxone powder should to be reconstituted in water for injection only. For administration
by IV infusion, dilute each dose of ceftriaxone in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg
and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children 20 kg and over and in adults.
(c)Dilute each dose of clindamycin in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of
100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children 20 kg and over and in adults.
(d)Dilute each dose of amoxicillin/clavulanic acid in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of
100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride in children 20 kg and over and in adults. Do not dilute in glucose.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Venomous bites and stings
Snake bites and envenomation
 
Clinical manifestations and management of bites and envenomations are described in the table below.
 
In the event of coagulation abnormalities, continue to monitor once daily until coagulation returns to normal.
 
For all patients, be prepared for an anaphylactic reaction, which, despite its potential severity (shock), is
usually more easily controlled than coagulation disorders or serious neurological disorders.
 
 
Clinical signs and treatment
 More than 50% of the bites are dry bites, i.e. no envenomation occurred. In the event that venom is injected, the
severity of envenomation depends on the species, the amount of venom injected, the location of the bite (bites on
the head and neck are the most dangerous) and the weight, general condition and age of the individual (more serious
in children).
It is rare that the snake involved is identiﬁed. However, observation of the clinical signs may orient diagnosis and
management. Two major syndromes are identiﬁed:
neurological disorders that evolve towards respiratory muscle paralysis and coma are common manifestations
of elapid envenomation (cobra, mamba, etc.);
extensive local lesions (intense pain, inﬂammation with oedema and necrosis) and coagulation abnormalities are
common manifestations of viperid or crotalid (rattle snake) envenomation.
Early diagnosis and monitoring of coagulation abnormalities is based on whole blood clotting tests performed in a
dry tube (at the patient’s arrival and then every 4 to 6 hours for the ﬁrst day).
Take 2 to 5 ml of whole blood, wait 30 minutes and examine the tube:
Complete clotting: no coagulation abnormality
Incomplete clotting or no clotting: coagulation abnormality, susceptibility to bleeding a
Aetiological treatment is based on the administration of snake antivenom serum, only if there are clear clinical
manifestations of envenomation or coagulation abnormalities are observed.
Antivenom sera are effective, but rarely available (verify local availability) and difﬁcult to store. Antivenom serum
should be administered as early as possible: by IV infusion (in 0.9% sodium chloride) if using a poorly puriﬁed serum;
by slow IV in the event of severe envenomation if the serum is known to be well puriﬁed. Repeat antivenom serum
administration after 4 or 6 hours if the symptoms of envenomation persist.
 
 
In asymptomatic patients (bites without signs of envenomation and with normal coagulation), monitoring must
continue for at least 12 hours (24 hours preferred).
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Time
since
biteClinical manifestationsPossible
aggressorTreatment
Bite
0 Fang marks
Pain at the site of bite? Strict rest, immobilisation of the limb with a
splint to slow the diffusion of venom.
Wound cleansing.
Tetanus prophylaxis (Tetanus, Chapter 7).
Observe for manifestations of envenomation.
A the dispensary level, prepare patient
evacuation to a referral centre. (a) 
Envenomation
10-30
minutesHypotension, myosis, excessive
salivation and sweating, dysphagia,
dyspnoea
Local paraesthesia, paresisElapids Insert a peripheral IV line.
IV antivenom serum as soon as possible.
Inﬂammatory syndrome: intense pain,
extensive regional oedemaViperids
CrotalidsInsert a peripheral IV line.
IV antivenom serum as soon as possible.
Analgesics.
IV or PO anti-inﬂammatories. (b) 
 (b)  
30
minutes-
5 hoursCobra syndrome: bilateral eyelid drooping,
trismus, respiratory muscle paralysis
ShockElapids Intubation and assisted ventilation.
See Shock, Chapter 1.
30
minutes-
48 hoursHaemorrhagic syndome: epistaxis,
purpura, haemolysis or disseminated
intra-vascular coagulation
ShockViperids
CrotalidsMonitor coagulation (blood clotting test in a
dry tube).
Transfusion of fresh blood in the event of
severe anaemia.
See Shock, Chapter 1.
6 hours
or moreNo signs or changes in coagulation (non-
venomous snakes or snake bite without
envenomation)? Reassure the patient.
Send him home after 12 hours.
Tissue necrosis   Remove blisters, clean; daily (non occlusive)
dressings.
Surgical intervention for necrosis, depending
on the extent, after the lesions stabilise
(minimum 15 days).
(a)Tourniquets, incision-suction and cauterisation are ineffective and may be dangerous.
(b)Do not use acetylsalicylic acid (aspirin).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Scorpion stings and envenomation
 
 
 
Spider bites and envenomation
 
 
As well as the general measures listed above, treatment includes administration of 10% calcium gluconate by slow IV
in the event of muscle spasms (children: 5 ml per injection, adults: 10 ml per injection, administered over 10 to 20
minutes).
Incision and debridement of necrotic tissue are not recommended (not useful; may impair healing).
Hymenoptera stings (honeybees, wasps and hornets)In case of clinical evidence of infection only: drainage of any abscess; amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) for
7 to 10 days in case of cellulitis.
Infections are relatively rare, and most often associated with traditional treatment or with nosocomial transmission
after unnecessary or premature surgery.
In most cases, the sting causes local effects including: pain, oedema, erythema. Management includes strict rest,
wound cleansing, analgesics PO, and tetanus prophylaxis (see Tetanus, Chapter 7).
In patients with signiﬁcant pain, inﬁltrate the area around the sting with local anaesthetic (1% lidocaine). Observe
for 12 hours.
General signs appear in the event of severe envenomation: hypertension, excessive salivation and sweating,
hyperthermia, vomiting, diarrhoea, muscle pain, respiratory difﬁculties, seizures; rarely, shock.
Aetiological treatment:
The use of scorpion antivenom sera is controversial (most of them are not very effective; they may be poorly
tolerated due to insufﬁcient puriﬁcation).
In practice, in countries where scorpion envenomations are severe (North Africa, the Middle East, Central America
and Amazonia), check local availability of antivenom sera and follow national recommendations.
The criteria for administration are the severity of the envenomation, the age of the patient (more severe in children)
and the time elapsed since the sting. This should not exceed 2 to 3 hours. If the time elapsed is more than 2 or 3
hours, the beneﬁt of antivenom serum is poor in comparison with the risk of anaphylaxis (in contrast to
envenomation by snakes).
Symptomatic treatment:
In the event of vomiting, diarrhoea or excessive sweating: prevention of dehydration (oral rehydration salts),
especially in children.
In the event of muscle pain: 10% calcium gluconate slow IV (children: 5 ml per injection, adults: 10 ml per
injection, administered over 10 to 20 minutes).
In the event of seizures: diazepam may be used with caution; the risk of respiratory depression is increased in
envenomated patients (see Seizures, Chapter 1).
Treatment is usually limited to wound cleansing, strict rest, analgesics PO and tetanus prophylaxis (see Tetanus,
Chapter 7).
Severe envenomations are rare. There are two main clinical syndromes:
Neurotoxic syndrome (black widow spider): severe muscle pain, tachycardia, hypertension, nausea, vomiting,
headache, excessive sweating. The signs develop for 24 hours and then resolve spontaneously over a few
days.
Necrotic syndrome (recluse spider): local tissue lesions, possible necrosis and ulceration; mild general signs
(fever, chills, malaise and vomiting) which usually resolve over a few days. If present, haemolysis may sometimes
be life threatening.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
 
For children, if 1 ml syringe is not available, use a diluted solution, i.e. add 1 mg epinephine to 9 ml of 0.9% sodium
chloride to obtain a 0.1 mg/ml solution (1:10 000):
Children under 6 years: 1.5 ml
Children from 6 to 12 years: 3 ml
Repeat after 5 minutes if no clinical improvement.
In patients with circulatory collapse or those who deteriorate despite receiving IM epinephrine, use IV epinephrine
(for doses, see Anaphylactic shock, Chapter 1).
 Local care: remove the embedded sting (bee); clean with soap and water; calamine lotion if pruriginous (children and
adults: one application 3 to 4 times daily in a thin layer).
Analgesics if necessary (paracetamol PO).
In the event of an anaphylactic reaction:
epinephrine (adrenaline) IM
Use undiluted epinephrine solution (1:1000 = 1 mg/ml) and a 1 ml syringe graduated in 0.01 ml in children:
Children under 6 years: 0.15 ml
Children from 6 to 12 years: 0.3 ml
Children over 12 years and adults: 0.5 ml
Footnotes
(a)There can be a considerable delay between the decrease in coagulation factors (less than 30 minutes after the bite) and
the ﬁrst signs of bleeding (other than bleeding at the site of the bite and/or the development of sero-sanguinous blisters),
which may appear only 3 days after the bite. Conversely, bleeding may resolve prior to normalization of coagulation
parameters.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Dental infections
Infection arising as a secondary complication of an inﬂammation of the dental pulp. The severity and the treatment of
dental infections depend on their evolution: localised to the infected tooth, extended to adjacent anatomical
structures or diffuse infections.
Clinical features and treatment
Infection localised to a tooth and its surroundings (acute dental abscess)
Infections extending to adjacent anatomical structures (acute dento-alveolar abscess)
Local spreading of an acute dental abscess into the surrounding bone and tissue.
Notes:
If the dental procedure has to be delayed (local anaesthesia not possible due to inﬂammation, signiﬁcant
trismus), start an antibiotherapy, but the dental procedure must be completed in the following days.
If there is no improvement within 48 to 72 hours after the dental procedure, do not change antibiotic, but start a
new procedure on the tooth.
Infections extending into the cervico-facial tissuesIntense and continuous pain.
On examination: swelling limited to the gum surrounding the infected tooth. Purulent exudate may be present
draining either through the root canal, or through the periodontal ligament (loosening the tooth) or through a gingival
ﬁstula. There are no signs of the infection extending to adjacent anatomical structures nor general signs of
infection.
Treatment:
Treatment is only surgical (the source of infection is inaccessible to antibiotics): root canal therapy (disinfection
of the root canal) if possible or extraction of the tooth.
Pain: paracetamol or ibuprofen PO (see Pain, Chapter 1).
Painful gingival and buccal swelling with warm and tender skin, developing into a ripe abscess: intense pain, with
trismus, particularly if the infection is in a posterior tooth, presence of general signs (fever, fatigue, cervical
lymphadenopathy).
In patients with acute gangrenous cellulitis (crepitations on palpation), treat as an infection extending into the
cervico-facial tissues (see below).
Treatment:
First surgical: incision and drainage of the pus or extraction of the tooth.
Then antibiotic treatment for 5 days following the procedure: 
amoxicillin PO
Children: 25 mg/kg 2 times daily 
Adults: 1 g 2 times daily
Pain: paracetamol or ibuprofen PO (see Pain, Chapter 1).
Extremely serious cellulitis, with rapidly spreading cervical or facial tissue necrosis and signs of septicaemia.
Treatment:
treatment in an intensive care unit.
high dose antibiotic treatment (see Necrotising infections of the skin and soft tissues).
extraction of the tooth.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 11: Mental disorders in adults
Anxiety
Insomnia
Agitation
Acute confusional state (delirium)
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Depression
Psychotic disorders
Acute psychotic episode
Chronic psychoses
Bipolar disorder
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Anxiety
Last updated: November 2021
 
A patient suffering from anxiety has:
 
Anxiety is a common feature in depression, post-traumatic stress disorder and psychosis. It can also occur in isolation,
not associated with any other mental disorders. Anxiety symptoms often occur immediately after a difﬁcult life event.
Medically unexplained symptoms are frequent in refugees and people exposed to adversity; in certain cultures they may
be the only expression of psychological distress. 
Management
Try to determine the source of the anxiety and reassure the patient (without minimising the distress or symptoms). If
necessary, use simple relaxation techniques to alleviate the symptoms.
 
If symptoms are exacerbated (e.g., tachycardia, feeling of suffocation, fear of dying or “going crazy,” agitation, or
conversely, prostration), it may be necessary to administer diazepam: 5 to 10 mg PO or 10 mg IM, to be repeated
after one hour if required.
 
Acute severe anxiety may justify a short course (max. 2 or 3 weeks) of:
diazepam PO: 2.5 to 5 mg 2 times daily; reducing the dose by half in the last few days of treatment
 
Moderate anxiety lasting more than 2 weeks, administer as ﬁrst-line treatment: 
hydroxyzine PO: 25 to 50 mg 2 times daily (max. 100 mg daily)
or, only if there is no improvement after 1 week, diazepam PO: 2.5 to 5 mg 2 times daily for max. 2 weeks.
 
If symptoms recur after treatment discontinuation, do not resume diazepam or hydroxyzine. Re-evaluate for possible
depression or post-traumatic stress disorder.
 
For generalised anxiety that lasts more than 2 months, and does not improve with psychosocial interventions, an
antidepressant should be prescribed (ﬂuoxetine or paroxetine PO: 20 mg once daily), to be continued for 2 to 3
months after symptoms resolve then, stop gradually over 2 weeks.psychological symptoms: pervasive worries, e.g. fear of having a serious illness, fear with no clearly-deﬁned object
or phobias;
behavioural changes: nervousness, avoidance behaviour, self-isolating tendency, irritability;
physical symptoms: e.g. dry mouth, “lump in the throat”; sometimes medically unexplained symptoms (e.g. feeling of
malaise, hot ﬂashes or chills, diffuse pain);
concentration difﬁculties, sleep problems (difﬁculty getting to sleep, recurrent nightmares).
 a 
Footnotes
(a)For example, in case of hyperventilation, use a technique that controls the respiratory rate: get the patient in a comfortable
position with his eyes closed. Help him focus on his breathing so that it becomes calmer and more regular, with three-phase
breathing cycles: inhalation (count to three), exhalation (count to three), pause (count to three), etc.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Insomnia
Last updated: November 2021
 
Complaints may be: difﬁculty falling or remaining asleep, waking up too early in the morning, nightmares, or fatigue.
Symptoms occur at least three times a week for at least one month.
Management
If insomnia is related to an organic cause, treat the cause (e.g. administer analgesics for pain).
 
If insomnia is related to the use of alcohol, drugs or a medication, management depends on the substance involved.
 
If insomnia is related to a particular life event (e.g. bereavement), a short term treatment with a sedative may be useful:
promethazine PO: 25 mg once daily at bedtime for 7 to 10 days
or, if promethazine is not available, hydroxyzine PO: 25 mg once daily at bedtime for 7 to 10 days
or, as a last resort (risk of addiction), diazepam PO: 2 to 5 mg once daily at bedtime for 7 days max.
 
If insomnia persists, re-evaluate the patient. Insomnia is a common feature in depression (Depression), post-traumatic
stress disorder (Post-traumatic stress disorder) and anxiety disorders (Anxiety). In such cases, the underlying disorder
should be addressed.
  a 
Footnotes
(a)The main drugs known to cause sleep problems are corticosteroids, beta blockers, levodopa/carbidopa, ﬂuoxetine,
levothyroxine, etc.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Agitation
Last updated: November 2021
 
People who have recently experienced violent events, or with anxiety, depression, psychotic disorders or delirium, may
have periods of psychomotor agitation.
Agitation is common in acute intoxication (alcohol/psychostimulant drugs) and withdrawal syndrome. Certain drugs may
cause agitation (selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs), levodopa, meﬂoquine, efavirenz, etc.).
Agitation may be accompanied by oppositional, violent or ﬂeeing behaviour.
Management
Clinical evaluation is best performed in pairs, in a calm setting, with or without the person’s family/friends, depending on
the situation.
 
It is essential to check for signs of delirium. If present, the priority is to identify the cause and treat it (see Acute
confusional state).
 
It may be necessary to administer diazepam 10 mg PO to reduce the agitation and conduct the clinical exam, without
over-sedating the patient.
 
If the patient is violent or dangerous, urgent sedation is required: diazepam IM 10 mg, to be repeated after 30 to 60
minutes if necessary.
Physical restraint should only be used in certain circumstances, strictly following the procedure in place. 
 
Avoid diazepam if agitation is related to acute alcohol intoxication or in case of delirium (risk of respiratory depression).
Use haloperidol (see Acute confusional state).
 
Alcoholic patients can experience withdrawal symptoms within 6 to 24 hours after they stop drinking. Withdrawal
syndrome should be taken into consideration in patients who are hospitalised and therefore forced to stop drinking
abruptly. In the early phase (pre-delirium tremens), the symptoms include irritability, a general feeling of malaise, profuse
sweating and shaking. Treatment consists in:
diazepam PO (10 mg every 6 hours for 1 to 3 days, then reduce and stop over 7 days)
+ oral hydration (3 litres of water daily)
+ thiamine IM or very slow IV (100 mg 3 times daily for at least 3 days)
 
If the agitation is associated with anxiety, see Anxiety; if associated with psychotic disorders, see Psychotic disorders.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute confusional state (delirium)
Last updated: July 2022
 
Clinical features
The clinical picture includes:
These symptoms develop rapidly (hours or days), and often ﬂuctuate during the course of the day.
Agitation, delusions, behavioural disorders and hallucinations (often visual) may be associated symptoms.
Management
Delirium almost always has an organic cause:
Also consider the use of drugs which may cause delirium (opioid analgesics, psychotropic drugs, ﬂuoroquinolones, etc.),
use of toxic substances (alcohol/drugs), or withdrawal from these substances.
 
Delirium requires hospitalisation.
 
The administration of diazepam may increase delirium. If it is absolutely necessary to sedate an agitated patient, use
low dose haloperidol for a short time (7 days or less):
haloperidol PO: 0.5 to 1 mg 2 times daily
or haloperidol IM: 0.5 to 1 mg, to be repeated if the patient is still agitated 30 to 60 minutes after the ﬁrst injection. 
If necessary, administer additional doses every 4 hours, do not exceed a total dose of 5 mg daily.
 
In case of delirium related to alcohol withdrawal (delirium tremens):disorientation in time and space;
impaired consciousness;
concentration problems;
memory impairment.
Infectious: meningitis, severe malaria, encephalitis, septicaemia, syphilis, AIDS, etc.
Metabolic: hyper/hypoglycaemia, electrolyte imbalance, niacin (vitamin PP or B) or thiamine (vitamin B)
deﬁciencies, etc.3 1
Endocrine: thyroid disorders
Neurological: epilepsy, raised intracranial pressure, head trauma, meningeal haemorrhage, brain tumour, etc.
Treat the underlying cause.
Provide supportive care (i.e. nutrition, ﬂuid, electrolyte balance); ensure bladder function.
Ensure that the patient receives only medications appropriate to their needs.
Treat pain if needed (see Pain, Chapter 1);
Ensure adequate sensory environment: low lightening, limit noise.
Admit the patient to an intensive care unit.
Administer diazepam IV: 10 to 20 mg 4 to 6 times daily, under close supervision with ventilation equipment near at
hand.
The goal is to achieve mild sedation without provoking respiratory depression. The doses and duration of the
treatment are adjusted according to the clinical progress.
IV hydration: 2 to 4 litres 0.9% sodium chloride per 24 hours.
Administer thiamine IM or very slow IV (over 30 minutes): 100 mg 3 times daily for 3 to 5 days.
Monitor vital signs and blood glucose levels.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Post-traumatic stress disorder
Last updated: November 2021
 
An event is “traumatic” when someone has been directly confronted with death, either by seeing another person being
killed or seriously injured as the result of violence, or by experiencing serious harm, such as a threat to his/her life or
physical integrity (e.g. rape, torture). Exposure to one or several of these events causes feelings of helplessness and
horror.
 
Immediate, transitory symptoms (disorientation, anxiety, sadness, ﬂeeing, etc.) are to be distinguished from secondary,
long-lasting problems that appear and/or last several weeks or months after the event: post-traumatic stress, often
associated with depression (Depression), or sometimes acute psychosis (Psychotic disorders), even in people with no
history of psychotic symptoms.
 
Post-traumatic stress disorder is characterized by three types of psychological response, generally seen in
combination.
Hypervigilance (constant state of alert), exaggerated startle reaction, anxiety, insomnia, poor
concentration; sometimes somatic symptoms (sweating, shaking, tachycardia, headache, etc.).
 
Re-experiencing is highly distressing and causes disorders that may worsen over time; people isolate themselves,
behave differently, stop fulﬁlling their family/social obligations, and experience diffuse pain and mental exhaustion.
Management
Psychological intervention is essential to reduce the suffering, disabling symptoms and social handicaps resulting from
PTSD.
 
It is important to reassure the patient that their symptoms are a normal response to an abnormal event. Sessions
should be conducted with tact. The patient should be listened to. Avoid intensely questioning the patient about their
emotions: leave it to the patient to decide how far they want to go.
 
Associated symptoms (anxiety or insomnia), if persistent, can be relieved by symptomatic treatment (see Anxiety and
Insomnia) for no more than two weeks.
 
If the patient has severe symptoms (obsessive thoughts, pronounced hypervigilance, comorbid despression etc.), the
pharmacological treatment is ﬂuoxetine PO (20 mg once daily) or paroxetine PO (10 to 20 mg once daily) or sertraline
PO (50 mg once daily), to be continued for 2 to 3 months after symptoms resolve then, stop gradually.  
  [1] 
Persistent re-experiencing
The patient describes:
images, thoughts or perceptions related to the traumatic experience, which intrude despite efforts to block
them out, including at night in the form of distressing dreams;
ﬂashbacks during which the patient “relives” parts of the traumatic scene.
Avoidance 
The patient tries to avoid: 
places, situations and people that might be associated with the trauma;
having thoughts or feelings related to the trauma; patients may use alcohol, drugs or any psychotropic agents
for this purpose.
Persistent perceptions of heightened current threat 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
References
1.World Health Organization. Post traumatic stress disorder. International Classiﬁcation of Diseases for Mortality and
Morbidity Statistics, Eleventh Revision (ICD-11).
https://icd.who.int/browse11/l-m/en#/http://id.who.int/icd/entity/2070699808 [Accessed 26 January 2021]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Depression
Last updated: July 2022
 
Depression is characterised by a set of symptoms that have been present at least two weeks and represent a change
from previous functioning.
 
The standard criteria for diagnosis of major depressive disorder are:
 
The features of depression can vary according to the patient’s culture. For example, the depressed patient may
express multiple somatic complaints rather than psychological distress. Depression may also manifest itself as an
acute psychotic disorder in a given cultural context.
Management
When faced with symptoms of depression, consider an underlying organic cause (e.g. hypothyroidism or Parkinson’s
disease) or adverse effects from medical treatment (corticosteroids, cycloserine, efavirenz, meﬂoquine, etc.). Look for
a triggering event (e.g. sexual violence, recent childbirth and post-partum depression).
 
Depressive disorders are the most common mental disorders in patients with severe chronic infectious diseases such
as HIV infection or tuberculosis. These disorders should not be neglected, especially as they have a negative impact on
adherence to treatment.
 
Symptoms of depression are common after a major loss (bereavement, forced displacement, etc.). They gradually
subside, in most cases, with social support. Psychological support may be useful.
 
Pharmacological treatment should always be offered, along with counseling, to patients with severe depression
(Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) score > 19; severe functional impairment, psychotic symptoms, and/or
suicidal risk). 
 
In patients with moderately severe depression (PHQ-9 score 15-19), pharmacological treatment should be considered
if there is no improvement after 3 counselling sessions, or from the outset if patients express a personal preference for
it.
 
Before prescribing, make sure that 9-month treatment and follow-up (psychological support, adherence and response)
are possible.
 Pervasive sadness and/or a lack of interest or pleasure in activities normally found pleasurable and
At least four of the following signs:
Signiﬁcant change in appetite or weight
Insomnia, especially early waking (or, more rarely, hypersomnia)
Psychomotor agitation or retardation
Signiﬁcant fatigue, making it difﬁcult to carry out daily tasks
Diminished ability to make decisions or concentrate
Feelings of guilt or worthlessness, loss of self-conﬁdence or self-esteem
Feelings of despair
Thoughts of death, suicidal ideation or attempt
 a 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Preferably use a serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SRI), particularly in older patients. Preferably use ﬂuoxetine, except during
pregnancy when sertraline is preferred.
ﬂuoxetine PO: 20 mg on alternate days for one week, then once daily for 3 weeks, then increase the dose if necessary
(max. 40 mg daily); use with caution in patients with severe anxiety disorders or who are immobilised (e.g. wounded)
or
paroxetine PO: 10 mg once daily for 3 days, then 20 mg once daily for 3 weeks, then increase the dose if necessary
(max. 40 mg daily), especially if the depression is accompanied by severe anxiety
or
sertraline PO: 25 mg once daily for 3 days, then 50 mg once daily for 3 weeks, then increase the dose if necessary
(max. 100 mg daily)
 
Assess tolerance and response every week for 4 weeks. If the response is inadequate after 4 weeks at optimal dose
or if the SRI is poorly tolerated, replace with another SRI (there is no need for a medication-free interval between the
two).
If SRIs are not available, amitriptyline PO may be used as an alternative: start with 25 mg once daily at bedtime and
gradually increase over 8 to 10 days to 75 mg once daily (max. 150 mg daily). The therapeutic dose is close to the
lethal dose; in older patients, reduce the dose by half.
 
There is a delay of 2 to 3 weeks before the antidepressant effect of SRIs occurs, at least 4 weeks for amitriptyline.
During this period, anxiety may be exacerbated and the risk of suicide may increase, especially with
ﬂuoxetine. Hydroxyzine PO (25 to 50 mg 2 times daily, max 100 mg daily) or promethazine PO (25 to 50 mg once daily
at bedtime) may be given for the ﬁrst 2 weeks of treatment. If there is no improvement after 1 week, change to
diazepam PO (2.5 to 5 mg 2 times daily) for 2 weeks max. 
 
During the ﬁrst 2 to 4 weeks, do not give the patient more tablets than the quantity required for each week or entrust
the treatment to someone in the patient's close entourage that can initially ensure administration of the drug.
 
Severe depression carries the risk of suicide. Talking to patients about this will not increase the risk of suicide attempt.
On the contrary – depressed people are often anxious and ambivalent about suicide and feel relieved when able to talk
about it.
 
If major symptoms have not improved after a month of treatment, increase to the maximum dose and assess after 2
weeks. If there is no improvement, refer the patient to a psychiatrist, if possible; if not, try a different antidepressant.
 
The treatment should always be stopped gradually over a 4-week period. Inform the patient about problems
associated with abrupt treatment discontinuation (very common with paroxetine).
Special situations: pregnant or breast-feeding women
Re-evaluate the need to continue treatment. If treatment is still necessary, it is best to continue a treatment that
has been effective rather than switching to a different antidepressant. Nevertheless, if the woman plans to
breastfeed and is taking ﬂuoxetine, consider switching to another SRI at least 3 weeks before expected delivery to
reduce adverse effects in the neonate during breastfeeding. Monitor the neonate the ﬁrst few days of life for signs
of toxicity or withdrawal symptoms.
Depression is more frequent in the post-partum (breast-feeding) period than in pregnancy. In case of severe post-
partum depression in a breast-feeding woman: use sertraline as ﬁrst-line option, or if not available, use paroxetine:
do not administer ﬂuoxetine. In case of severe depression during pregnancy: use sertraline, avoid paroxetine.Pregnancy in a woman under antidepressants:
Depression occurring during pregnancy or during post-partum period:
 
FootnotesThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
(a)Hence the importance of working with an “informant” (in the anthropological sense of the word) when dealing with
unfamiliar cultural contexts.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Psychotic disorders
 
 
 
 
Last updated: July 2022
 
Psychoses are characterised by delusions (the patient is convinced of things that are not real and not accounted for by
the person’s cultural background), or hallucinations (the patient hears voices that do not exist) and behavioural
symptoms (e.g. strange behaviour, agitation, mutism, opposition, ﬂeeing). 
 
Management includes psychosocial support and antipsychotic medication.
Treatment efﬁcacy and prognosis depend largely on the quality of the therapeutic relationship established with the
patient and their family.
Keeping the patient at home with outpatient follow-up is preferred if there is no risk of self-harm or harm to others, and
if the family is capable of managing the disorder.
 
Interpretation of psychotic symptoms vary according to the cultural context. For example, psychotic disorders may
be attributed to charms or to ancestor intervention. Therapeutic approach should take those beliefs into account.
Patients are usually already under “traditional” treatments, this should not be seen as an obstacle to conventional
medical treatment.
 Acute psychotic episode
Chronic psychoses
Bipolar disorder
 a 
Footnotes
(a)Hence the importance of working with an “informant” (in the anthropological sense of the word) when dealing with
unfamiliar cultural contexts.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute psychotic episode
 
 
Last updated: July 2022
 
An acute psychotic episode can be a one-time occurrence, usually of sudden onset, or can occur repeatedly, or it may
be the early phase of chronic psychosis. It can occur following an adverse life event (e.g. loss, acute stress or trauma).
In postpartum psychosis, delusions are frequently related to the mother-child relationship.
 
Before prescribing antipsychotic medication, consider the possibility of an underlying organic cause (see Acute
confusional state (delirium)) or substance use; check and record blood pressure, heart rate, weight.
 
Antipsychotic treatment is the same as for chronic psychoses (haloperidol or risperidone) and should last at least 3
months. After 3 months, if the patient is stable, stop the treatment gradually over 4 weeks, monitoring for potential
relapse. If the acute episode lasted more than 3 months, continue antipsychotic treatment for at least 2 years.  
 
For severe anxiety or agitation, a short-course anxiolytic or sedative treatment may be added to the antipsychotic
treatment, at the beginning of treatment.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chronic psychoses
 
 
Last updated: July 2022
 
Chronic psychoses (schizophrenia, paranoid psychosis, etc.) are deﬁned by speciﬁc clinical characteristics and their
long-term nature.
Schizophrenia is characterized by delusions, disorganized thinking, hallucinations, depersonalisation, loss of motivation,
diminished emotional expression, impaired cognition, abnormal behaviour and neglected hygiene. Such patients are
often very anxious.
 
The goal of treatment is to reduce symptoms and improve social and occupational functioning. It offers real beneﬁts,
even if chronic symptoms persist (tendency toward social isolation, possible relapses and periods of increased
behavioural problems, etc.).
 
Before prescribing antipsychotic medication, consider the possibility of an underlying organic cause (see Acute
confusional state (delirium)) and use of substances. Check and record blood pressure, heart rate and weight. 
 
Treatment should last at least one year, possibly for life, particularly in patients with schizophrenia. Uncertainty about
the possibility of follow-up at one year or beyond is no reason not to treat. However, it is better not to start
pharmacological treatment for patients who have no family/social support (e.g. homeless), provided they do not have
severe behavioural disorders.
 
Only prescribe one antipsychotic at a time. To limit the risk of adverse effects, start treatment at a low dose and
gradually increase until the minimum effective dose is reached. In older patients, reduce the dose by half, whichever
medication is used. 
 
Haloperidol is the ﬁrst-line antipsychotic. Preferably use oral haloperidol with a view to switching to long-acting
haloperidol (haloperidol decanoate) if the patient is likely to need long-term treatment (e.g. patients with schizophrenia).
haloperidol PO: start with 0.5 mg 2 times daily for 3 days then 1 mg 2 times daily until the end of the ﬁrst week;
increase to 2.5 mg 2 times daily the second week. After 2 weeks, assess if the treatment is well tolerated and
effective. If it is not effective, check adherence; if necessary increase to 5 mg 2 times daily (max. 15 mg daily).
 
If haloperidol is not available, contraindicated or poorly tolerated, possible alternative are:
risperidone PO: 1 mg 2 times daily for one week, then 2 mg 2 times daily for one week; if necessary, increase to 3 mg
2 times daily as of the third week (max. 10 mg daily).
or
chlorpromazine PO (especially if a sedative effect is required): 
25 to 50 mg once daily in the evening for one week; if necessary, increase to 50 mg in the morning and 100 mg in the
evening for one week; if necessary, 100 mg 3 times daily as of the third week.
or 
olanzapine PO: 10 mg once daily; if necessary, increase by 5 mg every week (max. 20 mg daily).
 
In case of extrapyramidal symptoms, try reducing the dose of antipsychotic or, if the extrapyramidal symptoms are
severe, add biperiden PO: 2 mg once daily, increase if necessary up to 2 mg 2 to 3 times daily (if biperiden is not
available, use trihexyphenidyl PO at the same dosage). 
 
For severe anxiety, it is possible to add a short-course anxiolytic treatment (for a few days to max. 2 to 3 weeks) to
the antipsychotic treatment:
diazepam PO: 2.5 to 5 mg 2 times daily
 
For major agitation:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
haloperidol PO 5 mg + promethazine PO 25 mg, to be repeated after 60 minutes if necessary. After a further 60
minutes, if necessary administer promethazine IM 50 mg.
In case of hostile or agressive behaviour, use IM route (same dose), to be repeated after 30 minutes if necessary;
after a further 30 minutes, if necessary, administer promethazine IM 50 mg.
High doses of haloperidol can induce extrapyramidal symptoms, add biperiden if necessary.
diazepam PO or IM: 10 mg to be repeated after 60 minutes if necessary
Do not combine two antipsychotics.
 
For long-term treatment (e.g. patients with schizophrenia) a long-acting antipsychotic drug can be used once the
patient has been stabilised on oral treatment. The dosage depends on the oral dose the patient is taking. The switch
from oral to a long-acting antipsychotic should be gradual, according to a speciﬁc protocol. For information, at the
end of the transition period from oral to long-acting antipsychotic, the dose of haloperidol decanoate IM administered
every 3 to 4 weeks is approximately: 
For a patient on risperidone PO: gradually decrease the dose of risperidone by slowly introducing haloperidol PO then,
once the patient is stabilised, change to haloperidol decanoate every 3 to 4 weeks as above.
Special situations: pregnant or breast-feeding womenIf the patient is not under antipsychotic treatment:
If the patient is already under antipsychotic treatment:
Daily dose 
of haloperidol POMonthly dose of
haloperidol decanoate IM (a)
2.5 mg 25 mg
5 mg 50 mg
10 mg 100 mg
15 mg 150 mg
(a)If haloperidol decanoate is not available, ﬂuphenazine IM: 12.5 to 50 mg/injection every 3 to 4 weeks.
In the event of pregnancy in a woman taking antipsychotics: re-evaluate the need to continue the treatment. If
treatment is still necessary, administer the minimal effective dose and avoid combination with an anticholinergic
(biperiden or trihexphenidyl). Monitor the neonate for extrapyramidal symptoms during the ﬁrst few days of life.
First symptoms of psychosis during pregnancy: start with the lowest dose of haloperidol and only increase slowly if
necessary. 
Post-partum psychosis: if the woman is breast-feeding, haloperidol should be preferred.
Long-acting antipsychotics should not be administered.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Bipolar disorder
 
 
Last updated: July 2022
 
Bipolar disorder is characterised by alternating manic and depressive episodes, generally separated by “normal”
periods lasting several months or years.
 
Episodes of mania are characterised by elation, euphoria and hyperactivity accompanied by insomnia, grandiose ideas,
and loss of social inhibitions (sexual, in particular).
Depressive episodes are often severe, with signiﬁcant risk of suicide.
Look for family history of similar symptoms (particularly suicide), very frequent in bipolar patients.
 
Pharmacological treatment:
valproic acid PO: 200 mg 2 times daily (Week 1) then 400 mg 2 times daily (Week 2) then 500 mg 2 times daily
(Week 3). This is usually sufﬁcient to stabilise the patient; if necessary the dose may be increased by 500 mg weekly
(max. 1000 mg 2 times daily).
or
carbamazepine PO: 100 mg 2 times daily (Week 1) then 200 mg 2 times daily (Week 2) then 200 mg 3 times daily
(Week 3). This is usually sufﬁcient to stabilise the patient; if necessary the dose may be increased by 200 mg
weekly (max. 1200 mg daily). 
 
Long-term treatment for bipolar disorder is based on continuation of the treatment that led to the remission of the
manic episode: antipsychotic, mood stabilizer, or a combination of both.
Treatment can be initiated by a physician trained in mental health, but a consultation should be set up as soon as
possible with a specialist. 
  a 
Episodes of mania are treated with haloperidol PO: 5 mg once daily for 3 days, then 7.5 mg for one week; if
necessary, increase by increments of 2.5 mg per week (max. 15 mg daily). 
Possible alternatives: 
risperidone PO: 2 mg once daily; if necessary, increase in increments of 1 mg per week (max. 6 mg daily). 
or 
olanzapine PO: 10 mg once daily for 3 days; if necessary, increase in increments of 5 mg per week (max. 20 mg
daily). 
If there is improvement after one week of treatment, continue with the same dose for at least 8 weeks after
remission of symptoms.
Diazepam PO (5 to 10 mg daily) can be added during the ﬁrst 2 to 3 weeks.
If symptoms do not resolve after 2 weeks of antipsychotic treatment at maximum tolerated dose (and 2 different
antipsychotics have been tried), add a mood stabiliser:
Treatment should be continued until at least 8 weeks after complete remission of symptoms. Assess together with
the patient the beneﬁts and risks of pursuing long-term treatment. 
If is it decided to discontinue antipsychotic treatment, medication should be stopped gradually, monitoring for
possible relapse. 
Depressive episodes are treated as for depression (see Depression). 
If the patient has an episode of mania while on antidepressants, immediately stop antidepressants and treat the
episode of mania as above. An episode of mania while on antidepressants is indicative of bipolar disorder. This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Valproic acid is not recommended in women of childbearing age. If it is necessary to start treatment, use
carbamazepine.
If a woman of childbearing age is already taking valproic acid, switch to carbamazepine by gradually decreasing the
dose of valproic acid over a period of 2 weeks (do not stop treatment abruptly) while gradually starting carbamazepine.
If a woman becomes pregnant or is planning pregnancy it is essential to contact a specialist to re-evaluate whether the
treatment is still necessary and adjust the dose if needed.
 
Footnotes
(a)“Unipolar forms” are characterized by recurring episodes of depression.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chapter 12: Other conditions
Sickle cell disease
Diabetes type 2 in adults
Essential hypertension in adults
Heart failure in adults
Chronic heart failure
Acute heart failure (acute pulmonary oedema)
Endemic goitre and iodine deﬁciency
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Sickle cell disease
Homozygous sickle cell disease (SCD) is a life-threatening genetic disorder of haemoglobin (Hb). The abnormal Hb
(HbS) results in the distortion of red blood cells into a sickle shape leading to increased destruction (haemolysis), an
increase in blood viscosity and obstruction of capillaries (vaso-occlusion).
SCD is common in sub-Saharan Africa (1 to 3% of births), on the American continent, in India and in the Mediterranean
basin.
Clinical features
Major acute manifestations
Painful vaso-occlusive crises (VOC)
Fever
Look for infection: in particular pneumonia, cellulitis, meningitis, osteomyelitis and sepsis (patients are particularly
susceptible to infections especially due to pneumococcus, meningococcus and Haemophilus inﬂuenzae); malaria.
Acute severe anaemia
StrokeSymptoms generally begin after 6 months of age.
Major signs: recurrent painful crises, chronic anaemia, splenomegaly and frequently, growth retardation and
malnutrition in children.
Serious acute life threatening complications such as stroke, overwhelming infections and acute chest syndrome.
In populations in whom the disease is frequent, diagnosis is suggested by a family history of similar clinical signs.
Children under 2 years present with the hand-foot syndrome or dactylitis (acute pain and swelling in the hands or
feet).
Children older than 2 years and adults present with acute pain affecting the back, chest, abdomen (can resemble an
acute abdomen) and extremities.
Young children may have non-speciﬁc signs of a VOC: refusal to walk, irritability, lack of appetite, crying, whimpering
or moaning when touched, etc.
Look for an associated infection that might have precipitated the VOC.
In case of bony pain in a single location, unresponsive to analgesics (or a persistent limp in a child) associated with
fever and erythema or swelling, consider an osteomyelitis.
The chronic anaemia is often complicated by acute severe anaemia with gradually appearing fatigue, pallor of the
conjunctivae and palms, shortness of breath, tachycardia, syncope or heart failure.
The acute anaemia can be due to:
Acute severe haemolysis often secondary to malaria: fever, haemoglobinuria (dark urine) and yellow
conjunctivae.
Splenic sequestration (trapping of blood cells in the spleen), mostly in children 1 to 4 years: sudden enlargement
of the spleen, severe left upper quadrant pain, thrombocytopenia. Can lead to shock.
Aplastic crisis (transient suspension of red blood cell production by the bone marrow): impalpable spleen and
absence of reticulocytes.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute chest syndrome (ACS)
Priapism
Painful prolonged erection in the absence of sexual stimulation, also occurring in young boys. Risk of necrosis and
irreversible erectile dysfunction.
Laboratory and other investigations
Diagnosis
Other examinations
 
Management of major acute manifestationsMost often ischaemic (due to vaso-occlusion in cerebral vessels) but a stroke can also be haemorrhagic.
Sudden loss of motor function or aphasia, in children and in adults.
Signs can resemble meningitis and cerebral malaria: headache, photophobia, vomiting, stiff neck, alteration of
consciousness and neurologic signs or rarely seizures.
Chest pain, tachypnoea, respiratory distress, hypoxia; fever (more frequent in children); pulmonary inﬁltrate on chest
x-ray. Often proceeded by a VOC.
Complications: multiorgan failure (lung, liver, kidney).
Hb electrophoresis conﬁrms the diagnosis but is often unavailable.
If not available, a positive Emmel test (or sickling test) in the presence of clinical signs of sickle cell disease
supports the diagnosis.
Tests Indications
Haemoglobin • At the time of diagnosis and annually (frequently 7 to 9 g/dl).
• In case of VOC, fever, acute anaemia (≤ 5 g/dl or drop in Hb ≥ 2 g/dl below the
patient’s baseline), stroke, ACS.
• For monitoring of transfused patients.
Platelets • At the time of diagnosis and annually.
• In case of acute anaemia (thrombocytopenia - platelet count ≤ 100 000/mm if
splenic sequestration).3
Urine dipstick • In case of fever: look for a urinary tract infection.
• In case of acute severe anaemia: look for haemoglobinuria.
Malaria test In case of VOC, fever, acute anaemia or stroke.
Lumbar puncture In case of fever with meningeal signs or unexplained coma.
Other
(if available)• Complete blood count and reticulocyte count.
• Blood culture in case of fever.
• X-ray if suspicion of pneumonia, osteomyelitis, ACS.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Painful vaso-occlusive crisis (VOC)
 
For the treatment of pain according to intensity, see Pain (Chapter 1).
Fever and infection
 
 
 
 
 
ceftriaxone slow IVinjection (3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes)
Children < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg every 12 hours
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 2 g every 12 hours
+ cloxacillin IV infusion (60 minutes)
Children < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg every 6 hours 
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults: 3 g every 6 hours 
Administer IV therapy for at least 14 days. Then if the patient has improved, change to the oral route for an
additional 14 days of treatment with a combination of:
ciproﬂoxacin PO
Children < 35 kg: 15 mg/kg 2 times daily
Children ≥ 35 kg and adults: 500 mg 2 times daily
+ amoxicillin/clavulanic acid PO (see below) 
 
ceftriaxone IM or slow IV injection (3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes)
Children < 20 kg: 50 mg/kg once daily (max. 2 g/day)
Children ≥ 20 kg and adults: 1 to 2 g once daily
 
After 48 hours re-evaluate the patient:
amoxicillin/clavulanic acid (co-amoxiclav) PO for 7 to 10 days.
Use formulations in a ratio of 8:1 or 7:1 exclusively. The dose is expressed in amoxicillin:
Children < 40 kg: 50 mg/kg 2 times daily Moderate pain (at home):
Generous oral hydration (water, soup, juice, coconut water): minimum 100 ml/kg daily in children and 50 ml/kg
daily in adults (2.5 to 3 litres daily);
Warm compresses (application of cold is contra-indicated);
Level 1 (paracetamol and ibuprofen) and level 2 (tramadol) analgesics;
If pain is not controlled at home within 24 hours, seek medical attention.
Severe pain or pain not controlled at home (in hospital):
PO hydration (as above); if the patient is unable to drink sufﬁciently, IV hydration (Appendix 1); in the event of
dehydration, treat according to the degree of dehydration (see Dehydration, Chapter 1);
Level 3 analgesics (morphine);
Do not give routine antibiotics in the absence of fever; do not transfuse for VOC.
Admit to hospital:
All children less than 2 years;
Children with fever ≥ 38.5 °C and adults with fever ≥ 39.5 °C; patients who are critically ill appearingor have
acute anaemia. a  
PO or IV hydration (Appendix 1).
Treat malaria if present.
Treat bacterial infections according to cause.
Treat all patients with respiratory symptoms for pneumonia and ACS.
In case of osteomyelitis:
 b 
 c
If the source of infection is unknown:
 b 
If the patient is improving (afebrile, can drink), change to:This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Children ≥ 40 kg and adults:
Ratio 8:1: 3000 mg daily (2 tab of 500/62.5 mg 3 times daily)
Ratio 7:1: 2625 mg daily (1 tab of 875/125 mg 3 times daily)
Patients over 2 years without acute anaemia can continue treatment as outpatients.
Patients under 2 years or with acute anaemia or who cannot be monitored and treated at home by their family
should complete PO antibiotherapy in hospital.
Acute severe haemolysis
Aplastic crisis
Splenic sequestration
 
Note: splenectomy is contra-indicated (high operative mortality).
StrokeIf the patient is not improving, continue ceftriaxone until the patient is afebrile, then, change to PO treatment.
Monitor for acute anaemia.
Admit to hospital.
Treat malaria if present.
Transfuse packed red blood cellsif Hb < 5 g/dl or drop of 2 g/dl below the patient’s baseline. Target a Hb level of
9 g/dl. d e  
Start with 10 to 15 ml/kg in 3 to 4 hours. For information, 10 ml/kg of packed red blood cells usually raise the Hb
by 2.5 g/dl.
Repeat the Hb. If a second transfusion is needed, check for signs of ﬂuid overload before starting the
transfusion.
Measure Hb and perform urine dipstick in the following days. Further transfusions may be necessary if
haemolysis is ongoing.
Admit to hospital.
Treat an associated bacterial infection if present.
Transfuse as for haemolysis. Repeat the Hb every other day. An increasing reticulocyte count and a gradual
increase of the Hb indicate improvement. Follow patient until they have reached their baseline Hb.
Admit to hospital.
Treat hypovolaemic shock if present.
Monitor the size of the spleen.
Transfuse if Hb < 5 g/dl, target a Hb level of 7 to 8 g/dl maximum.
Administer ceftriaxone as above.
After clinical improvement, monitor for relapse (follow the size of the spleen).
Admit to hospital.
The treatment of choice for ischaemic stroke is an exchange transfusion to lower the concentration of HbS.
Transfer the patient to a specialized facility for further management (including prophylactic therapy to prevent
recurrences with transfusion program, hydroxyurea).
If the patient is awaiting transfer or if transfer is not possible:
Oxygen continuously, at least 5 litres/minute or to maintain the SpO between 94 and 98%. 2
Treat seizures if present.
Transfuse if the Hb ≤ 9 g/dl. Target Hb of 10 g/dl.
After the transfusion provide IV hydration (Appendix 1).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute chest syndrome
ceftriaxone slow IV injection (3 minutes) or IV infusion (30 minutes) for 7 to 10 days
Children < 20 kg: 50 mg/kg once daily (max. 2 g daily)
Children ≥ 20 kg and adults: 1 to 2 g once daily
+ azithromycin PO for 5 days
Children: 10 mg/kg once daily (max. 500 mg daily)
Adults: 500 mg on D1 then 250 mg once daily from D2 to D5
 salbutamol aerosol (100 micrograms/puff)
Children and adults: 2 to 4 puffs with a spacer every 10 to 30 minutes as needed
Priapism
Prevention of complications
Certain complications can be avoided with appropriate health education of patients/families, routine preventive care
and regular follow-up.
Education of patients (including children) and familiesAdmit to hospital.
Measure SpO and administer oxygen as in stroke. 2
PO hydration as for a VOC; if the patient is unable to drink sufﬁciently, IV hydration (Appendix 1) while monitoring for
ﬂuid overload; in the event of ﬂuid overload, administer one dose of furosemide IV (see Dehydration, Chapter 1).
Antibiotics:
 b 
Transfuse if symptoms are unresponsive to antibiotics and Hb < 9 g/dl.
If wheezing is present treat with:
Encourage deep breathing (incentive spirometry hourly).
Treat pain (see Pain, Chapter 1).
PO hydration as for a VOC; IV hydration if necessary (Appendix 1) and treat dehydration if present (see Dehydration,
Chapter 1).
Encourage urination, apply warm compresses, treat pain.
Erection > 4 hours: consider transfusion and refer to surgery.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Routine preventive care
phenoxymethylpenicillin (penicillin V) PO until age 15 years (at least until 5 years):
Children < 1 year: 62.5 mg 2 times daily
Children 1 to < 5 years: 125 mg 2 times daily
Children 5 to 15 years: 250 mg 2 times daily
 
Ensure that the child’s immunisations are up to date; if not, administer catch up vaccines:
 
folic acid PO(life-long treatment)
Children < 1 year: 2.5 mg once dailyBasic knowledge
Disease
Treatment
MonitoringChronic, necessarily transmitted by both parents, non-contagious.
Routine (see below) and symptomatic (pain).
Size of the spleen, temperature, baseline Hb.
Major precipitating factors of a painful crisis and how to prevent them
Cold
Excessive heat
Tight clothing
Dehydration
Excessive effort
InfectionsWear warm clothing, avoid bathing in cold water.
For example, avoid going out at mid-day.
Wear wide comfortable clothing without elastics.
Drink plenty of ﬂuids.
Moderate physical activity is beneﬁcial.
Follow routine treatments (including vaccination).
Principal complications requiring the patient to seek urgent medical advice
Pain unresponsive to analgesia after 24 hours or severe from the start.
Any fever (do not treat at home).
Respiratory problems (cough, difﬁculty breathing, chest pain).
Diarrhoea/vomiting and inability to drink.
Dehydration (dark, infrequent urine).
Anaemia (pale or yellow conjunctivae, pale palms, enlarged spleen).
Prevention of pneumococcal infections
Immunization
Children 
< 5 yearsDTP, hepatitis B, polio, measles, H. inﬂuenzae type B vaccines
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV13 or, if not available, PCV10)
Meningococcal conjugate vaccine in endemic areas
At 2 years: pneumococcal 23-valent polysaccharide vaccine, at least 8 weeks after the last
PCV13 or 10
Children 
> 5 yearsDTP or Td, hepatitis B, polio, measles, H. inﬂuenzae type B vaccines
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccine PCV13 (or PCV10)
Meningococcal conjugate vaccine in endemic areas
To support red blood cell production
 f  This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Children ≥ 1 year and adults: 5 mg once daily
 
meﬂoquine PO
Children 6 months to 5 years and > 5 kg: 5 mg base/kg once weekly
Do not use to treat malaria.
 
Routine follow-up of patients
Children < 5 years: every 1 to 3 months;
Children ≥ 5 years and adults: every 3 to 6 months.
 Malaria chemoprophylaxis (if malaria prevalence ≥ 5%)
Provide nutritional support at hospital discharge.
Between crises, for information:
After a crisis: as often as necessary, according to the clinical course.
Footnotes
(a)Critically ill appearing child: weak grunting or crying, drowsy and difﬁcult to arouse, does not smile, disconjugate or anxious
gaze, pallor or cyanosis, general hypotonia.
(b)For administration by IV route, ceftriaxone powder should to be reconstituted in water for injection only. For administration
by IV infusion, dilute each dose of ceftriaxone in 5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg
and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children 20 kg and over and in adults.
(c)Cloxacillin powder for injection should be reconstituted in 4 ml of water for injection. Then dilute each dose of cloxacillin in
5 ml/kg of 0.9% sodium chloride or 5% glucose in children less than 20 kg and in a bag of 100 ml of 0.9% sodium chloride or
5% glucose in children 20 kg and over and in adults.
(d)Always inquire how many transfusions a patient has previously received (risk of iron overload).
(e)Do not transfuse whole blood if possible (risk of ﬂuid overload).
(f)Iron is contraindicated in patients who have received multiple transfusions. Avoid combined preparations of iron and folic
acid.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Diabetes type 2 in adults
Diabetes is a metabolic disorder that leads to hyperglycaemia.
Type 2 diabetes usually occurs in adults and accounts for 90% of diabetes cases worldwide.
Type 2 diabetes can lead to acute complications, as well as chronic complications that result in serious organ damage
(cardiovascular events; diabetic retinopathy, neuropathy, nephropathy).
Clinical features
Diagnosis
Note: even in a symptomatic patient, it is preferable to perform a second blood glucose test to conﬁrm the result.
Treatment
Glycaemic targetsFew or no symptoms; symptoms of hyperglycaemia may be present: polyuria (frequent urination) and polydypsia
(excessive thirst and drinking).
In rare cases, patients may present with severe hyperglycaemia (impaired consciousness, coma or acute
dehydration).
Look for diabetes in the event of:
symptoms of hyperglycaemia;
cardiovascular disorders: stroke, myocardial infarction, hypertension;
peripheral neuropathies, foot ulcers, absence of tendon reﬂexes or peripheral pulse.
Diagnosis is made on one of the following results: [1] 
  Fasting blood glucose (a)Random blood glucose (b)Glycated Hb (c)
Symptomatic
patient1 fasting blood glucose
≥ 7 mmol/litre
(or ≥ 126 mg/dl)1 random blood glucose
≥ 11 mmol/litre
(or ≥ 200 mg/dl)1 HbA1c ≥ 6.5%
Asymptomatic
patient2 fasting blood glucose
≥ 7 mmol/litre
on 2 samples collected at 2
different times (d)1 random glucose
≥ 11 mmol/litre
followed by 1 fasting blood
glucose
≥ 7 mmol/litre2 HbA1c ≥ 6.5% 
on 2 samples collected at 2
different times(
(a)Fasting blood glucose test: performed on patient that has fasted at least 8 hours
(b)Random blood glucose test: performed at any moment of the day.
(c)Glycated Hb (HbA1c) reﬂects average glycaemia over around 3 months.
(d)For example, interval of at least one or more days.
 [2]This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Fasting blood glucose < 8.3 mmol/litre (or < 150 mg/dl) or HbA1c between 7 and 7.5.
The closer blood glucose levels remain to these values, the more cardiovascular complications are prevented or
delayed.
Depending on the context (healthcare provision) or patient proﬁle (elderly patient, history of severe hypoglycaemia or
long-standing poorly controlled diabetes), fasting blood glucose < 10 mmol/litre (or < 180 mg/dl) or HbA1c of around 8
are acceptable.
Blood glucose should not fall < 4.5 mmol/litre (or < 80 mg/dl) or HbA1c < 6.5.
Lifestyle and dietary advice
Pharmacological treatment
First-line treatment metformin PO.
The usual dose is 1 to 2 g daily. For information:
Week 1: 500 mg once daily in the morning at breakfast
Week 2: 500 mg 2 times daily (morning and evening) during meals
Increase in increments of 500 mg per week as long as the drug is well tolerated (max. 2 g daily, i.e. 1 g morning and
evening).
 
If glycaemic control is not acheived, administer metformin in combination with a sulfonylurea. 
Sulfonylurea doses are adjusted in increments to avoid the risk of hypoglycaemia, based on blood glucose results.
The usual dose is 5 mg 2 times daily. For information:
Week 1: 2.5 mg once daily in the morning at breakfast
Week 2: 5 mg once daily in the morning at breakfast
Increase in increments of 2.5 mg weekly until fasting blood glucose reaches target levels (max.15 mg daily).
The usual dose is 40 to 80 mg 2 times daily. For information:
Weeks 1 and 2: 40 mg once daily in the morning at breakfast
Increase in increments of 40 mg every 2 weeks (weeks 3 and 4: 80 mg once daily in the morning at breakfast) until
fasting blood glucose reaches target levels (max. 240 mg daily, i.e. 120 mg morning and evening).
 
If glycaemic control is not acheived with the combination of metformin + a sulfonylurea, continue metformin but
replace the sulfonylurea with intermediate-acting insulin SC: start with 0.2 IU/kg at bedtime. The dose is adjusted
after measuring fasting blood glucose in the morning. Once blood glucose levels have stabilized, test levels once
weekly then after each consultation. Doses of 1 IU/kg/day or more may be necessary to reach glycaemic targets. If
the necessary dose is over 0.5 IU/kg/day, administer in 2 injections daily.
Adjustment of intermediate-acting insulin dosage based on blood glucose levels a
Avoid sugared foods and drinks (but no excessive restriction of carbohydrates). 
High ﬁbre intake; limit animal fats and alcohol.
Physical activity.
Weight control. If BMI ≥ 25, try to reduce weight by 5 to 10%.
Stop smoking.
 b 
 [3] 
In patients under 60, glibenclamide PO: 
In patients over 60, gliclazide PO (immediate release tablet): 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
Example for a man weighing 79 kg:
Start with 16 IU per day (79 kg x 0.2 IU).
On D4, blood glucose is 14.6 mmol/litre. Add 4 IU (daily dose of insulin is 20 IU). 
On D8, blood glucose is 10.4 mmol/litre. Add 2 IU (daily dose of insulin is 22 IU). 
On D12, blood glucose is 6.1 mmol/litre. Glycaemic target is reached. 
Surveillance and monitoring
Laboratory surveillance
Clinical monitoringMorning blood glucose  Action
< 4 mmol/litre
< 70 mg/dlTreat hypoglycaemia (see Hypoglycaemia, Chapter 1).
Reduce daily dose of insulin by 2 to 4 units.
Maintain new dose for 4 days.
Check blood glucose after 4 days, readjust dose if glycaemic target has not been
not reached.
Check blood glucose again after 4 days and repeat the process until glycaemic
target is reached.
≥ 4 and < 8.3 mmol/litre
≥ 70 and < 150 mg/dlDo not change dose.
≥ 8.3 and < 11 mmol/litre
≥ 150 and < 200 mg/dlIncrease daily dose of insulin by 2 units.
Check blood glucose after 4 days, readjust dose if glycaemic target has not been
not reached.
Check blood glucose again after 4 days and repeat the process until glycaemic
target is reached.
≥ 11 and < 16,5 mmol/litre
≥ 200 and < 300 mg/dlIncrease daily dose of insulin by 4 units.
Check blood glucose after 4 days, readjust dose if glycaemic target has not been
not reached.
Check blood glucose again after 4 days and repeat the process until glycaemic
target is reached.
≥ 16.5 mmol/litre
≥ 300 mg/dlPerform dipstick analysis for ketones.
Treat hyperosmolar hyperglycaemia or ketoacidosis if present.
Patients on oral hypoglycemic agents: blood glucose test once a month to begin with, then during monitoring visits.
Patients on insulin: fasting blood glucose test during the dose adjustment phase then, if possible, once weekly, once
the insulin dose stabilised. 
HbA1c if available: every 3 months, then every 6 months if well stabilised.
Other necessary tests according to comorbidities and chronic complications.
Routine consultations: check blood pressure (should remain < 140/80 mmHg) and weight, examine feet.
Consultations once a month for the ﬁrst 6 months, then individualised frequency of consultations depending on the
patient's characteristics (e.g. once every 6 months if the diabetes is well controlled).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Patient education
 
ReferencesAnnual check-up: check for cardiovascular and neurological complications, evaluate renal function (serum creatinine
and proteinuria dipstick test), examination of teeth and gums.
Management of diabetes complications.
Lifestyle and dietary measures (diet, physical activity, etc.).
Patients on sulfonylurea or insulin therapy: signs of hypoglycaemia/hyperglycaemia and management.
Patients on insulin therapy: auto-administration (schedule, injection sites and techniques); storage of insulin; self-
monitoring of blood glucose and adjustment of doses in patients using glucometers.
Patients with sensory neuropathy or peripheral arterial disease: autoexamination of feet; prevention of foot lesions.
Footnotes
(a)These measures concern all patients regardless of medication prescribed. They can be sufﬁcient alone to normalize blood
glucose levels in certain patients.
(b)If metformin is contraindicated or not tolerated, replace with a sulfonylurea.
1.Partners in Health. Chronic care integration for endemic non-communicable diseases, Chapter 7, Table 7.1. PIH, Boston,
2013.
https://www.pih.org/sites/default/ﬁles/2017-07/PIH_NCD_Handbook.pdf.pdf [Accessed 13 June 2018]
2.American Diabetes Association. Glycemic targets. Diabetes Care 2017 Jan; 40 (Supplement 1): S48-S56.
https://doi.org/10.2337/dc17-S009 [Accessed 13 June 2018]
3.Joint Formulary Committee. British National Formulary (online) London: BMJ Group and Pharmaceutical Press.
http://www.medicinescomplete.com [Accessed 18 June 2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Essential hypertension in adults
Hypertension (or high blood pressure - HBP) is deﬁned as elevated blood pressure (BP) at rest that persists over time
i.e. measured 3 times during 3 separate consultations over a period of three months.
Essential hypertension is deﬁned as HBP of undetermined cause (the large majority of cases).
 
The global overall prevalence of HBP in adults aged 25 and over is around 40%.
 
Serious complications of HBP can be acute (hypertensive encephalopathy, left-sided heart failure, acute renal failure)
or delayed i.e. occur after a long period during which HBP has not been controlled (stroke, ischaemic heart disease,
peripheral arterial disease, chronic renal impairment).
 
For pregnancy-induced hypertension, see Essential obstetric and newborn care, MSF.
Clinical features
 
 
SBP ≥ 180 and/or DBP ≥ 110 and some symptoms (moderate headaches, epistaxis, dizziness, tinnitus, eye
ﬂoaters) but no signs of end-organ damage;
SBP ≥ 180 and/or DBP ≥ 110 and signs of end-organ damage:
Paraclinical investigations [1]
HBP thresholds:
HBP classiﬁcationBlood pressure (BP) in mmHg
Systolic (SBP) Diastolic (DBP)
Mild 140 or over 90 or over
Moderate 160 or over 100 or over
Severe 180 or over 110 or over
Severe HBP is deﬁned more by the presence of serious end-organ damage than the blood pressure reading:
Uncomplicated hypertensive crisis:
Hypertensive emergency:
intense headaches, nausea/vomitting, confusion, seizures, coma in the event of hypertensive
encephalopathy;
dyspnoea, chest pain in the event of heart failure or cardiac ischaemia;
rapid and/or irregular heart rate in the event of heart failure;
anuria, oliguria in the event of renal impairment.
History and clinical examination should look for: 
medications being taken that can cause or aggravate HBP; a
focal neurological sign(s) suggestive of stroke;
comorbidities and risk factors: heart failure, diabetes, renal impairment; excessive smoking or consumption of
alcohol, excess weight (BMI ≥ 25), etc.
Blood test: ionogram (particularly serum potassium levels), serum creatinine. 
Other necessary laboratory tests according to comorbidities (e.g. diabetes).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Long-term treatment
Lifestyle and dietary advice
Recommended for all hypertensive patients:
Pharmacological treatment 
Start with a monotherapy. One of four classes of antihypertensive drugs can be chosen as ﬁrst line treatment,
according to the patient’s characteristics (e.g. age, contra-indications, etc.). For information: 
 ECG and echocardiogram to look for signs of heart failure, coronary disease, or arrhythmia.
The goal of treatment is to lower BP. Target BP are:
SBP < 140 and/or DBP < 90
SBP < 140 and/or DBP < 80 in diabetic patients
SBP < 150 and/or DBP < 90 in patients aged > 80 years
In patients with mild HBP (SBP ≥ 140 and/or DBP ≥ 90) without associated cardiovascular disorders or stroke or
diabetes, start with lifestyle and dietary advice. 
Pharmacological treatment is indicated in the following cases:
SBP ≥ 160 and/or DBP ≥ 100;
HBP associated with cardiovascular disorder, stroke or diabetes;
HBP not controlled by lifestyle and dietary changes alone.
Reduce calorie and salt intake.
Regular physical activity.
Weight loss if BMI ≥ 25.
Stop smoking and alcohol consumption.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 
In patients with no comorbidity start with a thiazide diuretic and check BP after 4 weeks of treatment. 
If the treatment has been correctly taken but there is no improvement after 4 weeks, add a second antihypertensive
drug.
After 4 weeks of bitherapy, reevaluate. If the patient’s BP remains too high, consider triple-therapy.
 
In diabetic patients, if there is no improvement after 4 weeks of AEC inhibitor treatment taken correctly, add a calcium
channel blocker.
 
In patients with a cardiac disorder (heart failure or coronary heart disease), bitherapy is usually necessary from the start
(AEC inhibitor + beta-blocker).
Surveillance and monitoring
Laboratory surveillance
According to treatment (diuretic, AEC inhibitor, etc.): ionogram and serum creatinine every 6 to 12 months.
Clinical monitoring
Patient educationPatient with no comorbidities Patient with comorbidities
Thiazide diuretic After a stroke: thiazide diuretic
Patient > 65 years: thiazide diuretic or calcium
channel blocker Diabetic patient:
angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor
or beta blocker if concomitant cardiovascular disorder
Patient with black skin: thiazide diuretic or calcium
channel blocker (avoid ACE inhibitors)Renal impairment: ACE inhibitor
Thiazide diuretic:
hydrochlorothiazide PO: 12.5 to 25 mg once daily in the morning (max. 25 mg daily)
 
Angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor:
enalapril PO: start with 5 mg once daily. Gradually increase, every 1 to 2 weeks, according to BP, up to 10 to 20 mg
once daily (max. 40 mg daily).
In elderly patients or patients taking a diuretic or patients with renal impairment: start with 2.5 mg once daily.
 
Calcium channel blocker:
amlodipine PO: 5 mg once daily. Increase to 10 mg once daily if necessary (max. 10 mg daily). 
In elderly patients or patients with hepatic impairment: start with 2.5 mg once daily.
 
Beta-blocker:  (contra-indicated in patients with asthma)
bisoprolol PO: 5 to 10 mg once daily in the morning
Do not stop treatment abruptly (risk of malaise, angina).
Consultations every 3 months (BP, weight), then every 6 months, then individualised frequency of consultations
depending on the patient's characteristics.
Management of comorbidities (e.g. diabetes).This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment of hypertensive crisis
Uncomplicated hypertensive crisis 
Most frequent. Reassure the patient and prescribe rest. Check BP a few days later to start or adapt treatment.
Hypertensive emergency
Treat in an intensive care unit.
The aim is to reduce BP by 10 to 15% within the ﬁrst hour and to not reduce it more than 25% during the ﬁrst 24
hours. 
labetalol IV (contra-indicated in patients with asthma:
20 mg over at least 1 minute. Administer another dose after 10 minutes if BP has not decreased. If necessary, 40
mg doses are administered every 10 minutes until hypertension is controlled (max. 300 mg total dose).
 
ReferencesLifestyle and dietary advice.
Treatment observance: do not stop treatment abruptly, particularly if taking beta blockers (risk of malaise, angina).
Consultation in the event of epistaxis, tinnitus, eye ﬂoaters; adverse effects of treatment (e.g. cough with AEC
inhibitors, erectile dysfunction with beta blockers, oedema with calcium channel blockers).
Hypertensive encephalopathy: 
 b 
Stroke: do not try to decrease BP during the ﬁrst 3 days unless SBP is ≥ 220 and/or DBP ≥ 120 (in this event
administer labetalol). 
Acute pulmonary oedema: see Acute heart failure.
Footnotes
(a)Consider secondary hypertension caused by medications being taken, mainly NSAID, corticosteroids, opioids, oral
estroprogestogens, etc. Treatment, in this event, consists in stopping or replacing the causative drug.
(b)In patient with asthma, hydralazine IV: 5 to 10 mg diluted in 10 ml of 0,9% sodium chloride administered by slow IV, to be
repeated after 20 to 30 minutes if necessary.
1.World Health Organization. Media center. High blood pressure: a public health problem, 2018.
http://www.emro.who.int/media/world-health-day/public-health-problem-factsheet-2013.html [Accessed 12 September
2018]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Heart failure in adults
 
 
Heart failure (HF) is deﬁned as the inability of the heart to maintain adequate cardiac output. 
It is a serious condition, particularly frequent in people over 70 years. 
There are two types:
 
 
 chronic HF: gradual onset of signs of HF;
acute HF: sudden onset of life-threatening HF (cardiogenic acute pulmonary oedema or shock), in most cases in
patients with known cardiopathy.
Chronic heart failure
Acute heart failure (acute pulmonary oedema)
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Chronic heart failure
Clinical features
Fatigue  and/or progressive onset of dyspnoea, occurs on exertion and then at rest, accentuated by the decubitus
position, preventing the patient from lying down; peripheral oedema.
Oedema of the lower limbs, hepatomegaly, jugular vein distention, hepatojugular reﬂux; ascites in advanced stages.
Left and right-sided signs; right-sided signs are often the most prominent.
 
Evaluate severity of HF:
 
Identify causative or aggravating factors:
Paraclinical investigations
Treatment
Lifestyle and dietary adviceLeft-sided HF (left ventricle failure; most frequent form)
Right-sided HF (right ventricle failure)
Global HF (failure of both ventricles)
 [1] 
Class I No limitation of physical activity. No symptoms during ordinary physical activity.
Class IISlight limitation of physical activity. Comfortable at rest. Ordinary physical activity results in fatigue,
palpitation, dyspnoea.
Class IIIMarked limitation of physical activity. Comfortable at rest. Less than ordinary activity causes fatigue,
palpitation, or dyspnoea.
Class IV Unable to carry on any physical activity without discomfort. Symptoms of heart failure at rest.
Coronary or valvular heart disease, hypertension, viral or toxic cardiopathy, pericarditis.
Anaemia, American trypanosomiasis, rheumatic fever, diabetes, thyroid disorder, drug/alcohol addiction.
Cardiac ultrasound: if available, method of choice to conﬁrm cardiopathy.
Electrocardiogram (ECG): can diagnose left ventricular cardiomyopathy (left ventricular hypertrophy and/or left
bundle branch block) or arrhythmia and particularly atrial ﬁbrillation (AF or Aﬁb) or signs of myocardial ischemia or
infarction.
Chest x-ray: can exclude lung disease in patients with dyspnoea or can show cardiomegaly or pleural effusion (often
bilateral) and alveolar-interstitial syndrome.
Blood test: full blood count, ionogram, serum creatinine.
Other necessary laboratory tests according to comorbidities (e.g. diabetes, thyroid disorder).
Reduce salt intake to limit ﬂuid retention.
Normal ﬂuid intake except in cases of very severe oedema.
Stop smoking.
Physical activity adapted to the patient’s capacity.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment of ﬂuid retention
furosemide PO: start with 20 mg once daily; increase if necessary, according to clinical response (certain patients
need doses of 80 mg 1 to 2 times daily) then reduce once oedema decrease (20 to 40 mg once daily).
 
The reabsorption of oedema can sometimes be slow, taking up to 2 to 3 weeks.
The gradual worsening of HF may require an increase in dosage. Lifelong treatment with diuretics is not always
necessary. 
 
In the event of resistant oedema, add hydrochlorothiazide PO (25 mg 1 to 2 times daily for a few days) but only in
hospital settings and monitoring renal function.
Long-term (lifelong) treatment
Other treatmentsWeight loss if BMI ≥ 25.
ACE inhibitors are the ﬁrst line treatment. Start with low doses, especially in patients with hypotension, renal
impairment, hyponatraemia. 
While increasing the dose monitor: drug tolerance (dry cough), blood pressure (the systolic BP should remain above
> 90 mmHg), serum potassium and creatinine levels.
In patients taking diuretics, reduce the dose of the diuretic if possible while introducing ACE inhibitors (risk of
hypotension if the patient is on high doses of diuretics).
enalapril PO:
Week 1: 2.5 mg once daily for 3 days then 5 mg once daily 
Week 2: 10 mg once daily for 3 days then 20 mg once daily
The effective dose is usually 20 mg once daily (or 10 mg 2 times daily). Doses of 10 mg daily are sometimes
enough; conversely, doses of 40 mg daily (maximum) are sometimes necessary.
Once the patient has been stable for at least 2 weeks taking ACE inhibitors and in the absence of any contra-
indications (asthma, hypotension, bradycardia, conduction disorders, particularly atrio-ventricular heart blocks), add
a beta blocker.
bisoprolol PO: start with a low dose and gradually increase as long as the drug is well tolerated (monitor for signs
of worsening HF, blood pressure, heart rate).
Week 1: 1.25 mg once daily 
Week 2: 2.5 mg once daily
Week 3: 3.75 mg once daily
Weeks 4 to 8: 5 mg once daily
If insufﬁcient:
Weeks 9 to 12: 7.5 mg once daily
As from week 13: 10 mg once daily (max. 10 mg daily)
In the event of temporarily worsening HF, hypotension or bradycardia, readjust doses of associated treatments and
reduce the dose of bisoprolol or gradually stop treatment (stopping abruptly can lead to acute deterioration of the
patient’s condition). Once the patient is stabilized, re-increase/recommence bisoprolol.
Antagonist of aldosterone: only if serum potassium levels and ECG can be monitored (risk of severe hyperkalaemia),
add spironolactone PO (25 mg once daily) to long-term treatment, particularly in cases of severe HF (Classes III
and IV).
Nitrates: can be used in left-sided or global HF in patients with intolerance to ACE inhibitors (cough is not tolerated,
renal impairment, severe hypotension).
isosorbide dinitrate PO: start with 5 to 40 mg 2 to 3 times daily and increase up to the effective dose, usually 15
to 120 mg daily.This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Treatment of causative or aggravating factors
According to the cause.
Surveillance and monitoring
Laboratory surveillance 
According to treatment (ACE, diuretic, etc.).
Clinical monitoring
Patient education
 
ReferencesDigitalis glycosides: administer with caution, in intensive care unit (the therapeutic dose is close to the toxic dose),
only in patients with AF with rapid ventricular response conﬁrmed by ECG: no visible P waves, irregularly irregular
QRS complex (120-160).
Once stabilised, consultations once a month for the ﬁrst 6 months, then individualised frequency of consultations
depending on the patient's characteristics.
Routine consultations: weight curve, BP, progress of signs (dyspnoea, oedema, etc.).
Monitoring of comorbidities and causative or aggravating.
Lifestyle and dietary measures (diet, weight control, physical activity adapted to the patient’s capacity, etc.).
Warning signs (shortness of breath or oedema of the lower limbs, serious adverse effects of treatment) and
management (timely/urgent medical consultation).
1.Chop WM, Jr. Extending the New York Heart Association classiﬁcation system. JAMA. 1985;254:505.
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Acute heart failure (acute pulmonary oedema)
Last updated: April 2021
 
Clinical features
 
Signs of severity:
Paraclinical investigations
Diagnosis is mainly clinical.
 
If available:
Treatment
Systolic blood pressure is < 90 mmHg
See Shock, Chapter 1.
Systolic blood pressure is ≥ 90 mmHgSudden onset or exacerbation of dyspnoea
Fatigue, increased time to recover after exercise
Bilateral peripheral oedema
Cold extremities
Elevated jugular venous pressure
On auscultation: bilateral pulmonary crepitations and/or extra heart sound (gallop rhythm)
Severe respiratory distress (intercostal retractions, nasal ﬂaring, see-saw breathing, SpO < 90%,
etc.), cyanosis, profuse sweating, confusion2
Systolic blood pressure < 90 mmHg (cardiogenic shock) 
Rapid and excessive increase in arterial blood pressure (hypertensive emergency)
Heart rate (HR) > 130/minute or < 40/minute
Respiratory rate (RR) > 30/minute or < 12/minute 
Chest pain if underlying cardiac ischemia
ECG: look for signs of myocardial ischemia or arrhythmia.
Chest x-ray: signs vary depending on the severity of pulmonary oedema. In early stage, dilation of vessels in upper
lobes then perihilar haze and thickening of septa. In advanced stage, prominent opacities in hilar and perihilar regions
and pleural effusion. Can exclude other lung disease, such as pulmonary infection.
POCUS: a 
Perform 12-zone lung exam to evaluate for signs of bilateral pulmonary oedema and/or pleural effusions.
Perform 5-view cardiac exam to evaluate for signs of acute volume overload and/or decreased cardiac
function.
Monitoring: full blood count, electrolytes, serum creatinine; cardiac troponins if available.
 [1] [2]
The patient must be hospitalised.
Place patient in semi-seated position, legs down.
In patients with SpO < 90%, administer oxygen with a mask at the necessary ﬂow rate to maintain SpO ≥ 95%. If
pulse oximetry is not available, administer oxygen at a ﬂow rate of 6 to 10 litres/minute to patients with signs of2 2This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
isosorbide dinitrate sublingual (5 mg tablet)
 5 mg per dose; if necessary up to 2 doses taken 10 minutes apart
or
isosorbide dinitrate IV (10 ml ampoule, 1 mg/ml)
 2 mg (= 2 ml) by slow IV injection (over 2 minutes) then if necessary 2 to 10 mg/hour by continuous      infusion with
an electric syringe pump
or 
glyceryl trinitrate sublingual (0.5 mg tablet)
0.5 mg per dose; if necessary up to 3 doses taken 5 minutes apart
 
Subsequent treatment depends on the underlying pathology (chronic heart failure, hypertension, acute coronary
syndrome, etc.).
Referenceshypoxia.
Insert an IV line.
If there are signs of volume overload (and/or in case of hypertensive emergency): furosemide IV, 40 to 80 mg, may
be repeated if necessary according to urine output, signs of respiratory distress and SpO. If the patient was
already taking furosemide at doses of > 40 mg, administer pre-existing dose by IV route.2
Add a short-acting nitrate (vasodilator) if systolic blood pressure is > 100 mmHg. The aim is to gradually lower
systolic blood pressure to near-baseline value. If the patient’s baseline value is unknown, for information, lower
systolic blood pressure to 120-150 mmHg and the diastolic pressure to under 110 mmHg.
Non-invasive ventilation using continuous positive airway pressure (CPAP) is recommended in patients with
persistent hypoxaemia, unless contraindicated (e.g. impaired consciousness) and on condition that appropriate
monitoring is available.
Monitoring: HR, RR, BP, SpO, mental status, urine output. 2
Footnotes
(a)POCUS should only be performed and interpreted by trained clinicians.
1.Ponikowski P et al. 2016 ESC Guidelines for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure: The Task Force
for the diagnosis and treatment of acute and chronic heart failure of the European Society of Cardiology (ESC). Developed
with the special contribution of the Heart Failure Association (HFA) of the ESC. Eur J Heart Fail. 2016;18(8):891-975.
https://academic.oup.com/eurheartj/article/37/27/2129/1748921 [Accessed 23 March 2021]
2.Ezekowitz, Justin A. et al. 2017 Comprehensive Update of the Canadian Cardiovascular Society Guidelines for the
Management of Heart Failure. Can J Cardiol 2017;33:1342-1433.
https://www.onlinecjc.ca/action/showPdf?pii=S0828-282X%2817%2930973-X [Accessed 23 March 2021]
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Endemic goitre and iodine deﬁciency
Goitre is an enlargement of the thyroid gland. Endemic goitre occurs in iodine-deﬁcient areas. Goitre can also be
caused or aggravated by the regular consumption of goitrogens such as manioc, cabbage, turnips, millet etc.
 
Goitre is an adaptive process: iodine is essential for the production of thyroid hormones; iodine deﬁciency impairs
thyroid hormone synthesis; to compensate, the thyroid gland increases in volume. Thyroid function usually remains
normal.
 
As well as the development of goitre, iodine deﬁciency in pregnant women has serious consequences for the child
(foetal and perinatal mortality, physical and mental retardation, cretinism). These risks must be prevented by providing
iodine supplementation in iodinedeﬁcient areas.
Clinical features
Prevention and treatment
The objective of prevention is to reduce the consequences of iodine deﬁciency in neonates and children. Supplying
iodised salt through national programmes is the recommended method of prevention.
 
For prevention in populations living in iodine deﬁcient areas where iodised salt is not available and for curative
treatment of patients with goitre: use iodised oil, according to national protocols. For information (according to the
WHO):
 
 
Curative and preventive single-doses are the same. Oral treatment is preferred. The target populations are pregnant
and breastfeeding women, women of childbearing age and children.
 
In children, goitre disappears after several months. It disappears more slowly (or never) in adults despite restoration of
normal thyroid function in 2 weeks. Surgery is only indicated for patients with local mechanical dysfunction.The WHO proposes a simpliﬁed classiﬁcation based on the signiﬁcance of goitre:
Group 0: normal thyroid, no palpable or visible goitre
Group 1: enlarged thyroid, palpable but not visible when the neck is in the normal position
Group 2: thyroid clearly visible when the neck is in the normal position
Possible mechanical complications (rare): compression, deviation of the trachea or of the oesophagus.
PopulationIodised oil PO
once yearly 
(190 mg capsule)
Children under 1 year 1 capsule
Children from 1 to < 6 years 2 capsules
Children from 6 to 15 years 3 capsules
Pregnant or lactating women
or women of childbearing age2 capsulesThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Appendices
Appendix 1. Normal daily maintenance IV ﬂuids in children > 1 month
 
 
 
 
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Appendix 1. Normal daily maintenance IV ﬂuids
in children > 1 month
Last updated: January 2021
 
Indications
Basic hydration needsfor patients unable to drink sufﬁciently. After 48 hours, it is essential to provide nutrition to the
patient orally or by nasogastric tube and to gradually reduce IV ﬂuids.
 
This protocol should not be used for surgical or burns patients, those with renal, cardiac disease or diabetic
ketoacidosis.
Fluid to be administered
The ﬂuid of choice in children is Ringer lactate-Glucose 5% (RL-G5%). Use a premixed solution if available. If not,
add 50 ml of G50% to 500 ml of RL or 100 ml of G50% to 1000 ml of RL. If RL is not available, use 0.9% sodium
chloride instead.
 
For ease of prescription and administration, the daily volumes and rates in drops per minute have been rounded off.
  a  
 
 
WeightVolume
/24 hoursRate
(paediatric infusion set 1 ml = 60 drops) (*) 
3 to < 4 kg 350 ml/24 h 15 drops/min
4 to < 5 kg 450 ml/24 h 19 drops/min
5 to < 6 kg 550 ml/24 h 23 drops/min
6 to < 7 kg 650 ml/24 h 27 drops/min
7 to < 8 kg 750 ml/24 h 31 drops/min
8 to < 9 kg 850 ml/24 h 35 drops/min
9 to < 11 kg 950 ml/24 h 40 drops/min
11 to < 14 kg 1100 ml/24 h 46 drops/min
14 to < 16 kg 1200 ml/24 h 50 drops/min
16 to < 18 kg 1300 ml/24 h 54 drops/min
18 to < 20 kg 1400 ml/24 h 58 drops/minThis site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
 WeightVolume 
/24 hoursRate
(paediatric infusion set
1 ml = 60 drops) (*) Rate 
(standard infusion set 
1 ml = 20 drops)
20 to < 22 kg 1500 ml/24 h 63 drops/min 21 drops/min
22 to < 26 kg 1600 ml/24 h 67 drops/min 22 drops/min
26 to < 30 kg 1700 ml/24 h 71 drops/min 24 drops/min
30 to < 35 kg 1800 ml/24 h 75 drops/min 25 drops/min
≥ 35 kg 2000 ml/24 h 83 drops/min 28 drops/min
(*)In a paediatric infusion set, the number of drops per minute is equal to the number of ml per hour.
For example: 15 drops/min = 15 ml/hour
Footnotes
(a)Daily needs are calculated according the following formula:
Children 0-10 kg: 100 ml/kg per day
Children 11-20 kg: 1000 ml + (50 ml/kg for every kg over 10 kg) per day
Children > 20 kg: 1500 ml + (20-25 ml/kg for every kg over 20 kg) per day
Adults: 2 litres per day
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies
Main references
 
Websites consulted between June 2019 and December 2022
British National Formulary (BNF) and British National Formulary for Children (BNFc)
MedicinesComplete
 
Martindale. The Complete Drug Reference
MedicinesComplete
 
UpToDate. Evidence-based clinical decision support resource
 
BMJ Group. BMJ Best Practice.
 
La revue Prescrire
 
Centre belge d’information pharmacothérapeutique (CBIP)
http://www.cbip.be/fr/start
 
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
http://www.cdc.gov/DiseasesConditions/
 
Cochrane Library
 
World Health Organization
http://www.who.int/publications/en/
This site uses cookies to enhance your browsing experience. By clicking "Accept All", you agree to the storing of cookies
on your device. Read our Privacy Policy
SubmitAccept AllStrictly necessary
Functional
Performance Cookies

